=== INTEGRATION RELATED SECTIONS ===
Found in 22 pages



--- PAGE 21 ---

The second compartment is the containment atmosphere. The activity entering the containment
atmosphere during a time step is the activity released from the fuel during that time step. Activity is
removed from containment atmosphere during the time step by radiological decay, removal processes
(for example, removal by containment sprays), and leakage to the environment.
Time steps may be of varying length. A source term time step starts whenever the user changes any of the
time-dependent data or every 15 minutes, whichever occurs first. Time steps may be no less than 1
minute and must be an integral number of minutes. Before passing the source term to the atmospheric
transport model, RASCAL 3.0.5 converts the source term time steps into 15-minute time steps that start
on the hour because the atmospheric transport models require that regularity.
The remainder of this chapter describes in detail how RASCAL 3.0.5 calculates the time-dependent
source term for various accident types.
1.2.2 Time Core Is Uncovered Source Term
Perhaps the most powerful and important source term type that RASCAL 3.0.5 calculates is based on the
time that the core is uncovered. Almost all of the radioactivity at a nuclear power plant is contained in
fuel rods. A large release is not possible unless many fuel rods are substantially damaged. The only way
this can reasonably occur is by loss of water from the primary coolant system so that the reactor core is
left uncovered by water. If a user estimates how long a reactor core will not be covered with water,
RASCAL 3.0.5 can estimate the amount of core damage that will occur and from that estimate the
activity of each fission product nuclide that will be released from the core.
When a RASCAL 3.0.5 user specifies how long the core is uncovered, RASCAL 3.0.5 will estimate how
much core damage will occur based on the damage timings in Tables 1.3 for BWRs and 1.4 for PWRs.
(Tables 1.3 and 1.4 are taken from Tables 3-12 and 3- 13 in NUREG-1465, Soffer et al. 1995.) For
example, if a BWR or PWR core is uncovered for 15 or 30 minutes, the estimated damage is 50% or
100% cladding failure, respectively. If a BWR core is uncovered for 1 hour, the estimated damage will be
100% cladding failure plus 33% core melt.
1-7

--- PAGE 52 ---

RASCAL 3.0.5 then calculates the radionuclide inventories in a single fuel assembly by dividing the
bumup corrected core inventory by the number of assemblies in the core (from the reactor database).
These are the inventories present in a fuel assembly at the time of reactor shutdown. If the spent fuel
involved in the accident is specified in terms of "batches," the batch inventories are calculated by
dividing the core inventories by 3. (A batch is assumed to be one-third of a core.)
The inventories at the time of the accident are then calculated by correcting for radiological decay and
ingrowth since their last irradiation.
For spent fuel assemblies damaged underwater or stored in dry casks, the user defines how long ago the
fuel was removed from the reactor. A radiological decay correction using that duration is applied to all
the damaged fuel. Decay and ingrowth are calculated using the methods described in Section 1.7.
A different scheme is used with the pool drained scenario. The user defines fuel amounts as either
assemblies or batches in 3 age classes: less than 1 year, I to 2 years, and longer than 2 years. All fuel in
each age category is decayed for a set time. For fuel that has been out of the reactor for 0 to 1 year, the
decay time is set to one week. This simple approximation can greatly overestimate the size of the release
if the fuel has been in storage much longer than one week. For fuel that has been in storage for 1 to 2
years, the decay time is set equal to 1 year. For fuel that has been out of the reactor for more than 2 years,
the decay time is set equal to 2 years.
2.3 Fractions of Inventory Available for Release in Spent Fuel Accidents
The fractions of the radionuclide inventories that are available for release during an accident AF. are
shown in Table 2. 1.
Table 2.1 Fuel Release Fractions Used in Spent Fuel Accidents
Release fraction by release type
Nuclide group Cold gap Hot gap Cladding
fire
Noble gases (Xe, Kr) 0.4 0.4 1
Halogens (I, Br) 3x10-3 3x10-2 0.7
Alkali metals (Cs, Rb) 3x103 3x102 0.3
Tellurium group (Te, Sb, Se) 1x104 1x10"3 6x10-3
Barium, strontium (Ba, Sr) 6x10-7 6x106 x10"4
6
Noble metals (Ru, Rh, Pd, Mo, Tc, Co) 6x10-7 6x10-6 6x10-6
Cerium group (Ce, Pu, Np) and Lanthan ides 6x 10-7 6x 10-6 2x 10-6
(La, Zr, Nd, Eu, Nb, Pm, Pr, Sm, Y, Cm, Am)
Source: Table 3.2 in NUREG/CR-6451 (Travis, Davis, Grove, and Azarm 1997) rounded to I significant figure. The
cladding fire release fractions are the geometric mean of the high and low fractions.
2-2

--- PAGE 57 ---

3 Fuel Cycle and Materials Source Terms
The source term calculations in RASCAL estimate the amount of radioactive (or hazardous) material
released based on a wide variety of potential radiological accident scenarios. The source term
calculations performed that pertain to fuel-cycle facility and materials accidents can be generally
categorized as (1) fuel-cycle facility/UF accidents, (2) uranium fires and explosions, (3) criticality
6
accidents, and (4) isotopic releases (e.g., transportation, materials).
3.1 Basic Method to Calculate the Source Term
RASCAL 3.0.5 calculates source terms by time steps. For each time step, RASCAL 3.0.5 first calculates
the activity that is present (the "inventory T"). Second, RASCAL 3.0.5 calculates the fraction of the
inventory that is released from the reactor fuel FRF.T hird, the product of those two terms is multiplied
by a reduction factor RF (for example, for reduction by filters or containment sprays). Reduction factors
can include several factors working simultaneously. Last, RASCAL 3.0.5 calculates the source term S
released to the atmosphere .bym ultiplying by the leakage fraction LF. These calculations are described by
the equation:
Si(k) = L(k) x AFi(k) x RF(k) x LF(k) , (3.1)
where
S,(k) = activity of radionuclide i released to the environment during time step k,
I,(k) = inventory of radionuclide i at time step k,
AF,(k) = available fraction for release for radionuclide i during time step k,
RFi(k) = reduction factor for radionuclide i during time step k,
LF(k) = leakage fraction to the environment during time step k.
The time steps may be of varying length. A source term time step starts whenever the user changes any of
the time-dependent data or every 15 minutes, whichever is less. Time steps may be no less than 1 minute
and must be an integral number of minutes. Before passing the source term to the atmospheric transport
model, RASCAL 3.0.5 converts the source term time steps into 15-minute time steps that start on the
hour because the atmospheric transport model requires that regularity.
3.2 UF Releases from Cylinders
6
Starting Inventory
The inventory (I) of UF available for release from cylinders can be described by the user in two ways:
6
1. The user specifies the number and types of cylinders releasing their contents. Table 3.1 lists the
cylinder types available and the mass of UF each contains. Each cylinder is assumed to be filled to
6
its capacity. The total starting inventory is the sum of the number of each type of cylinder times the
amount of UF in that type of cylinder.
6
2. The user specifies a total mass of UF in cylinders that can be released.
6
3-1

--- PAGE 73 ---

At long down-wind distances where the vertical dispersion parameter is the same magnitude as the
mixing layer thickness, the puff model can be further simplified by assuming that material is uniformly
distributed in the vertical. With this last assumption, the puff model becomes
1 [FIIr_(cid:127)121
,z(r)/Q - 2,Hexp 2 - , (4.3)
where
H = mixing layer thickness.
RASCAL 3.0.5 switches to the uniformly mixed model when u, > 1.05H.
4.1.2 Straight-Line Gaussian Plume Models
Puff models represent plumes as a series of puffs. Concentrations at a point in the plume are calculated
by adding the concentrations at the point associated with all puffs in the vicinity of the point. In effect,
the puff models perform a numerical time integration of concentration as puffs pass by the point. Near a
release point, the meteorological conditions may be assumed to be constant as the puff moves from the
source to the receptor. If the wind speed is assumed to be much greater than zero and the point for which
the concentration is to be calculated is sufficiently far down wind that the change in dispersion
parameters with distance as puffs pass the point can be neglected, then the puff model can be integrated
analytically to give a plume model.
Assuming that the x-axis is aligned with the mean transport direction and that the mean wind speed is u,
then the average concentration during plume passage is given by
p (x-ut 2]
Q'FyF.
2"(x,yz)= (2) 3xp a.(x)ay(x)az(x) - -2p o/x) ] Idt (4.4)
where
X = average concentration,
Q' = release rate,
F,, F, = lateral and vertical exponential terms, shown above,
x.= downwind distance at which X, a,, ay and a,a re evaluated,
u = wind speed,
t = time.
On integration, the plume model becomes
(x,y , z)/Q': F, (4.5)
2mnu ao, -. ,
which is a simplified version of the straight-line Gaussian model used in RASCAL 3.0.5.
The straight-line Gaussian plume model for ground-level releases is frequently given as
4-3

--- PAGE 76 ---

4.1.4 Model Domains and Grids
The plume model and the puff model use different model domains. The plume model domain consists of
a polar grid with receptor nodes on circles at 10' intervals at eight radial distances that may be adjusted
to suit the problem at hand. The puff model domain consists of a square Cartesian grid with receptor
nodes uniformly spaced throughout the domain. The polar grid has a higher node density near the release
point than the Cartesian grid, and conversely, the Cartesian grid has a higher node density in the far field
than the polar grid.
The sizes of the model domains are linked. If the 10-mile Cartesian grid is selected, the polar grid will
have a default maximum radius of 2 miles. Similarly, the 25- and 50-mile Cartesian grids have
corresponding default polar grids of 5 and 10 miles, respectively. The default radial distances for the
polar grids should be satisfactory for most applications. However, the RASCAL 3.0.5 user can change
the radii values if other calculational distances are more appropriate.
In general, the receptor nodes for the two grids do not coincide. This fact leads to computational
differences in the doses reported in the maximum value tables in the model output for the two models for
wind directions other than north, east, south, or west. The doses reported for the close-in plume model
are for the plume centerline at each distance. The doses reported for puff model are the highest doses
calculated at nodes at about the nominal distance -- for example, 5 miles. The node with the highest dose
may or may not be on plume centerline, and may be nearer to or farther from the release point than the
nominal distance. When a direct comparison of doses calculated by the two models is desired, the wind
direction for the period of calculations should be north, east, south, or west. For these wind directions,
both the plume model and the puff model calculate plume centerline concentrations and doses.
4.2 Transport
Atmospheric transport refers to the movement of material with the wind from the source to downwind
receptors. The following two sections describe the treatment of atmospheric transport in RASCAL 3.0.5.
4.2.1 Puff Model Transport
Unlike the plume model, the puff model explicitly accounts for transit time in all calculations because the
model tracks the movement of individual puffs and calculates concentrations and doses based on puff
positions. As a result, dose rates calculated by the puff model may be used to estimate the time of arrival
of a plume and may be compared with dose rates measured in the field. Decay and ingrowth of
radionuclides and depletion of the puffs as a result of wet and dry deposition are calculated at 5-minute
intervals.
The puff model differs significantly from the plume model in that neither the wind data nor the wind
fields are modified to force the centers of puffs to pass directly over the receptor nodes. As a result, when
the wind direction is constant, the puff model may not calculate centerline concentrations and doses.
However, as time goes by and atmospheric conditions (wind direction, wind speed, stability, mixing layer
thickness, and precipitation) change, the puff model will give more realistic concentration and dose
patterns than the plume model. In addition, the puff model will give more realistic concentration and dose
patterns than the plume model when topography modifies the winds because the wind fields used by the
4-6

--- PAGE 77 ---

puff model may be modified to account for topography. The wind data used by the plume model are not
modified to account for topography.
The movement of puffs is controlled by the wind at the center of the puff as it moves through the model
domain. The spatial variation of winds is represented in the plume model by two-dimensional fields of
vectors that give the direction and speed of puff movement. These fields are prepared by the
meteorological model discussed in Section 6 and are updated at 15-minute intervals based on the
available wind data.
Calculation of puff movement is a six-step process. In sequence, the steps are
I. Make an initial estimate of the direction and speed of the puff movement given the current puff
position and height above ground using bilinear interpolation (Press, et al. 1986) of the vectors at the
nearest nodes of the field;
2. Make an initial estimate of the puff position at the end of the period using the initial estimates of
direction and speed;
3. Make a second estimate of the direction and speed of puff movement using the estimated puff
position at the end of the period;
4. Make a second estimate of the puff position at the end of the period using the estimate of direction
and speed from step 3;
5. Average the.end points calculated in steps 2 and 4;
6. Calculate the final estimate of direction and speed of puff movement using the puff's initial position
and the average end point calculated in step 5.
The actual puff movement for the period may take place in one or several steps. The step size is adjusted
to ensure adequate accuracy in the integration of concentrations that takes place at receptors. Errors in
the integration should be less than 5% at typical wind speeds. Larger errors may occur near the release
point in high wind speed conditions,, because the minimum step size is 30 seconds. These larger errors
should not be a problem because plume model output should be used for receptors near the release point.
The vector fields prepared by the meteorological program are for a height of 10 meters aboveground.
These vectors are used for puffs that represent ground-level releases. If the actual release height is greater
than 12 meters, a wind-speed profile is used to adjust the transport speed from 10 meters to the puff
transport height. The profile used to adjust the wind speed considers both surface friction and
atmospheric stability (see Panofsky and Dutton 1984, Sections 6.4-6.6).
4.2.2 Plume Model Transport
The RASCAL 3.0.5 plume model is a straight-line Gaussian model. As this name implies, the model
assumes straight-line transport based on the wind direction at the time and place of release. The plume
model rounds the wind direction to the closest 100 as it calculates the transport direction to ensure that
the axis of the plume passes directly over receptors.
4-7

--- PAGE 78 ---

As is common in straight-line Gaussian models, transit time is not considered in determining when
material arrives at receptors; material arrives at receptors at the time of release. As a result, dose rates
calculated by the RASCAL 3.0.5 plume model cannot be used to estimate the time of arrival of a plume
at a receptor and are not likely to correspond with dose rates measured in the field.
Transit time, calculated using the wind speed at the release height, is used to calculate the decay of
radionuclides between the source and the receptors. It is also used to calculate depletion of material in
the plume due to dry and wet deposition. Decay calculations are performed at 5-minute intervals;
depletion is calculated for the full transit time.
4.3 Dispersion Parameters
In RASCAL 3.0.5, the horizontal dispersion parameters (ay and cr) are calculated using empirical curves
derived from the results of a large number of dispersion experiments conducted in the 1950s and 1960s.
The experiments, which were conducted over relatively flat terrain, typically involved tracer releases
ranging from about 10 minutes to 1 hour in duration with ground-level concentration measurements at
distances ranging from 100 meters to several kilometers. Only a few direct measurements of vertical
dispersion parameters ((Y) were made. Consequently, vertical dispersion parameters were estimated with
dispersion models using measured values of the horizontal dispersion parameter and measured
concentrations. Dispersion parameters have been summarized in many forms. Perhaps the best known
summary is the set of dispersion parameter curves called the Pasquill-Gifford curves (Gifford 1976).
4.3.1 Normal Dispersion
Regulatory guidance published by the NRC includes graphic depiction of these curves, and numerical
approximations to the curves are included in many computer codes used by the NRC. In RASCAL 3.0.5,
dispersion parameters are estimated using the same basic algorithms that were used in earlier RASCAL
versions (Athey et al. 1993) and are used in other NRC codes including PAVAN (Bander, 1982) and
XOQDOQ (Sagendorf, et al., 1982). These parameterizations have generally been attributed to Eimutis
and Konicek (1972). However, the ay parameterization is properly attributed to Tadmor and Gur (1969),
and the az parameterization is properly attributed to Martin and Tikvart (1968).
The basic dispersion parameter relationships used in the NRC codes are
=-- a .YX0.9031
and
O0, = az(x)•x b; ) + c'(x) (4.12)
where
x = distance from the release point (in meters),
a,. is a function of stability class, and
a., b:, and cz are empirical values that are functions of stability class and distance.
4-8

--- PAGE 91 ---

of the exposure to the radionuclide during the 15-minute period, a radionuclide and organ specific dose
factor, and the breathing rate. The general expression for the dose equivalents is
D1 5 = vv DF JZf(t)dtI , (4.38)
h 0
where
D,5 = effective or organ committed dose equivalent due to inhalation during a 15-minute period,
v, = breathing rate,
DF, = committed or organ specific dose factor for radionuclide n,
X,, = radionuclide n concentration,
t = time.
Inhalation dose factors used in RASCAL 3.0.5 are from FederalG uidance Report No. 11 (Eckerman,
Wolbarst, and Richardson 1988). RASCAL 3.0.5 uses a breathing rate of 3.33x10 4 m3/s (20 I/min).
At the end of each 15-minute period, the committed dose equivalents at each receptor node are written to
*p uff and plume model output files. They are then set to zero prior to beginning model calculations for the
next 15-minute period.
4.9.2 Groundshine Doses
The puff and plume models calculate groundshine dose equivalents as the sum over all radionuclides of
product of the surface contamination by the radionuclide and a radionuclide-specific dose factor. The
general expression for the groundshine dose equivalent is
where
D. DF o. t)dt (4.39)
D,, = dose equivalent from groundshine during the period,
DFn = radionuclide n specific ground-shine dose factor,
o,, = radionuclide n surface concentration, and
t = time.
The integration in Eq. (4.39) is from t to t+15 minutes. These integration times are used because the
surface concentration at any time is cumulative from the beginning of the event and is not set to zero at the
beginning of the period. After the surface is contaminated, groundshine doses can be incurred, even if
airborne material is not present.
4.9.3 Cloudshine Doses
RASCAL calculates cloudshine doses using four models. The models include a semi-infinite cloud model
and a finite-puff model originally developed for MESORAD (Scherpelz, et al. 1986). The first of these
models assumes that activity is uniformly distributed through a large volume, and the second assumes that
activity is concentrated in a finite number of points distributed through a volume to represent the actual
4-21

--- PAGE 92 ---

activity distribution. The use of the semi-infinite cloud model is usually inappropriate in the immediate
vicinity of the release point, and application of the MESORAD finite-plume model to cloudshine dose
estimates near the release point did not prove satisfactory. Consequently, two additional cloudshine dose
model have been developed and are used in RASCAL 3.0.5.
The new cloudshine models are based on line sources and plane sources and are analogous to the point-
source model. These models are used, along with the point-source model, until plumes and puffs grow to
sufficient size that the assumptions associated with the semi-infinite cloud model are met. The finite-
plume, cloudshine models in RASCAL 3.0.5 make use of precalculated dose rate vs distance curves.
These curves are provided in the radionuclide database for each radionuclide for a I Ci (0.01 Sv) point
source, and a I Ci/m (0.01 Sv/m) infinite-line source. The remainder of this section describes the
cloudshine models.
4.9.3.1 Puff Model Cloudshine Dose Calculations
There are three stages in the cloudshine dose calculations. Near the source where puff dimensions are
small compared to the mean path length of photons, RASCAL uses a point-kernel dose model. When the
puff radius becomes sufficient (oy=400 m), cloud-shine dose rates beneath the centerline of the plume are
calculated using an infinite-slab model. The dose rate at ground level is calculated assuming that the
activity in the plume is equally divided among ten horizontal slabs with slab heights determined by the
release height and vertical dispersion coefficients. The change in dose rate with distance from slabs is due
only to buildup and absorption of photons; the change in dose rate across the plume is proportional to the
crosswind variation of activity concentration in the slab. This model will be discussed further. Finally,
when the vertical dimensions of the plume become sufficient (a,=400 m), cloudshine is calculated using a
semi-infinite cloud model.
The initial versions of RASCAL used the MESORAD finite-puff, cloudshine model (Scherpelz et al.
1986, Ramsdell et al. 1988). This model first calculates composite characteristics (photon energies,
photons per disintegration, etc.) of the gamma radiation from the radionuclide mix in a puff. Next, the
model calculates the dose rate vs distance from a point source having the composite characteristics using
Up (p) 2.13x 106 1,[f, B,(JP)e-,o"PE TW] (4.40)
44 n( p 2
where
Dp '(p) = dose rate in (rem/h)/Ci,
p = distance from point source,
fy = fraction of disintegrations producing ys of energy, E,,
By(u.,p) = buildup factor for air,
/Iay = linear attenuation factor for air,
EY= gamma energy,
T= mass energy absorption coefficient for tissue (n,1p,),
t
WY= ratio of whole body dose to surface dose.
The constant 2.13 x 106 is a collection of unit conversion constants to give dose rate in (rem/h)/Ci. The
components of the constant are described following Eq. 19 in Scherpelz, et al. (1986).
4-22

--- PAGE 94 ---

When the horizontal dispersion parameter reaches 400 m, the puff radius is large enough that the
horizontal variations in the cloud-shine dose rate are directly proportional to the horizontal variation in
concentration in the puff. At this point, MESORAD changed to a semi-infinite cloud model, and previous
versions of RASCAL changed to calculating dose rates beneath the center of the puff using the finite-puff
model and dose rates elsewhere using the horizontal variation in concentration. The puff model changes
from the point-source based cloud-shine model used in earlier versions of RASCAL to a new plane-source
based model. The plane-source model assumes that the puff is a vertical cylinder as is assumed in the
point-source model. However, rather than assuming that activity is distributed among volume elements,
the activity is assumed to be concentrated on ten horizontal slabs (planes).
To calculate the activity in each slab, the concentration at the center of the puff (y--O) is first integrated
vertically from the bottom of the puff to the top. This is similar to the integration done in calculating the
depletion from wet deposition
f Qn Q
e2dZ 4.44)
O, .
=Z)._,I . (2,T) 31-"2 ,2 exp I exp[-O, ]dz=_2Q~/7a"' f o; exp l -{ Oly] J(
where
(2), = vertically integrated concentration of radionuclide n at the center of the puff.
This concentration is then divided by the number of slabs (ten) to get the concentration in each slab.
Within the cylinder, the vertical position of the slabs is determined by the effective release height, the
mixing-layer thickness, and the vertical-dispersion coefficient. When a Gaussian distribution is partitioned
so the area under the curve is divided into ten equal parts and the center of mass of each part is
determined, these centers of mass fall at ±0.127a, ±0.385a, ±0.674;, +1.037a, and ±1.645a. Using this as
a basis, the slab heights are initially estimated as h_+0.127_, h_+0.385oF, he_+0.6740z, he±1.037a, and
h_+1.645G .The initial heights may lie below ground level or above the top of the mixing-layer. Any
2
heights that fall outside these bounds are adjusted to account for reflection by the boundaries. Signs of.
heights that are negative are changed to positive, and heights (hp) that are above the mixing layer are
replaced by 2H-hP.
The dose rate at ground level from a slab is calculated as
D'2,(r,z ) ). = - _' W r 2ýD,r exp - 04 _k o A - ý . 2e(4 ( 4 I 5 + k ) - z) , (4.45)
where
z z height of the slab above the receptor, which is assumed to be at I m (m),
DFP, = dose factor radionuclide n for an infinite plane [(rem/s)/(Ci/m2)1,
= total gamma ray absorption coefficient for air (m-'),
k = ratio of energy in scattered photons to absorbed energy.
4-24

--- PAGE 96 ---

4.9.3.2 Plume Model Cloudshine Dose Calculations
In the plume model, near the source, the plume is divided into a large number of equal-strength line
sources spaced to properly represent the distribution of activity in the plume. The dose rates from these
line sources are used to calculate the ground-level dose rate as a function of horizontal distance from the
plume axis. This relationship is then used to calculate dose rates and 15-minute doses at receptor
locations. When the width of the plume is sufficient (ay = 400 m), the plume model switches from the
line-source model to an infinite-slab model. Finally, when the vertical dimensions of the plume are
sufficient to make the semi-infinite cloud model appropriate (aY= 400 meters or a uniformly mixed plume
with a thickness of 600 meters), the plume model switches to a semi-infinite cloud model.
Dose rates from line sources are calculated using
N
D',(6)= Q'I.D'n(p) , (4.49)
n=[
where
D '(p) = dose rate (rem/s) at a distance p from an infinite line source of Q ' (Ci/m),
Q = line-source strength (Ci/m), Q ",= Q ' /u where Q ' is in Ci/s,
I
D = line-source dose rate factor [(rem/s)/(Ci/m)] for radionuclide n.
n(p)
Equation (4.49) is analogous to Eq. (4.42) with changes in the definitions of source term and dose factors.
The line-source dose rates are combined to get the plume dose rate by summing over all line sources, just
as the point-source dose rates were combined to get a puff dose rate. The number of line sources used is
determined by the horizontal dispersion parameter, oy. If a5y > 200 m, 100 lines (1Oxl0) are used to
describe the concentration distribution in the plume. Otherwise, the concentration distribution is described
by 36 lines (6x6). In either case, the lines are spaced horizontally and vertically such that each line
represents the same fraction of the total activity in the plume. The plume dose rate is given by
D'(y) - DD (YI , (4.50)
where
D '(y) = plume dose rate,
y = distance from the ground-level projection of the center of the plume,
CR = finite line correction factor,
N, = number of line sources (36 or 100),
i,j = line source indices,
D',(yj) = infinite line, line-source dose rate.
A finite-line source correction factor is included in Eq. (4.50) to account for the fact that the plume does
not extend upwind of the release point. A correction factor could be calculated by numerical integration of
4-26

--- PAGE 113 ---

where
"'H 0, = mass of liquid water entrained, and
2
f,2oH,,,= mass of water vapor entrained.
Finally, an iterative procedure is used to arrive at a plume temperature that gives the same mixture
enthalpy. During this procedure, the phase composition of the HIF-H 0 mixture and UF are adjusted as
2 6
the temperature changes. The convergence criterion for plume temperature is 0.1 'C. This precision is
more than adequate because the plume temperature is used only in plume-rise calculations.
5.3 Dispersion and Deposition of HF and U0 F
2 2
The UF model works in two stages. In the first stage, the model calculates the spread of the
6 UF 6 ,
conversion of UF to HF and U0 F, and the plume rise of the HF and U0 F .The products of this stage
6 2 2 2 2
are UJF , HF, and UO F source terms and the plume rise of HF and UO F, all as a function of distance
6 2 2 2 2
from the release point. In the second stage, a straight-line Gaussian model (based on the model described
in Chapter 4) is used to calculate airborne concentrations and deposition of HF and U0 F at receptors on
2 2
a polar grid. The distance-dependent source terms calculated in the first stage are used as long as UF is
6
present. After the UF is gone, the HF and UOzF source terms are depleted to account for deposition.
6 2
The UF chemical and thermodynamics models are run in the first stage while the control volume moves
6
downwind in small time steps. The maximum time step is 15 seconds. If, with the I-meter wind, the UF
6
control volume would reach the first arc of receptors in less than 75 seconds, the time step is reduced so
that the control volume reaches the first arc at the end of fifthtime step. As the control volume moves
downwind, plume rise is calculated using the stable plume equations discussed in Section 4.5.2. In
addition, transition plume rise is calculated using
Ah, 1.6F13x213u-1 (5.32)
where
Ah, = transition rise (m) (Briggs 1984),
Fb = buoyancy flux (m4/s3),
x = downwind distance, and
u = 10-m wind speed (m/s).
The smaller of the transition and final rise is selected as the plume rise.
Dispersion of the HF and UO F, plumes is calculated using the dispersion parameters that are used in the
2
main RASCAL 3.0.5 plume model. As long as unreacted UF is present, the HF and UOF plumes are
6 2
assumed to be uniformly mixed in the vertical because the plumes are being fed by the UF 6 - H 2 0 reaction.
Normalized HF and U0 F concentrations in this range are given by
2 2
5-11

--- PAGE 119 ---

6 Meteorological Data Processor
The meteorological data processor is the part of RASCAL 3.0.5 that allows the user to enter
meteorological data and prepares the data for use by the atmospheric transport and diffusion models.
Meteorological data for the site (release point) and as many as 35 additional meteorological stations may
be entered. All data must be entered manually at the present time. A future version of the meteorological
data processor may include options for importing meteorological data files.
The following sections describe the technical aspects of the meteorological data requirements and the
meteorological data processing.
6.1 ModeiDomain
Model domain refers to the area covered by the dose calculations in the source term to dose model. The
model domain for the puff model is square. The release point is at the center of the square. The user can
select a square that is 20, 50, or 100 miles (32, 80, and 160 km) on a side. The meteorological data
processor creates a meteorological file for the selected domain for use by the puff model. This file
describes the spatial and temporal variation of meteorological conditions at nodes on a Cartesian grid.
The meteorological data processor also creates a smaller file of meteorological data for the release point
for use by plume model and the UF plume model. This file describes the temporal variation of
6
meteorological conditions at the center of the polar grid used by these straight-line models.
Meteorological data must be entered for at least one location, generally the release site. If data are not
available for the release site, they may be entered for another location. However, the release location must
still be selected as if it had meteorological data because the location of the release site is used to fix the
position of the grid.
6.2 Meteorological Stations
Locations for which meteorological data are entered are called meteorological stations. Meteorological
stations may be within or near the model domain. Spatial fields of winds, stability, etc., are produced from
the station meteorological data. Section 6.3 discusses the meteorological data input.
Information on each station must be available before a station's meteorological data can be used in
generating the meteorological fields needed by the puff model. Files containing the required information
for each operating nuclear power plant, large fuel cycle facilities, and several major radioactive materials
facilities are included with RASCAL 3.0.5. Each file contains the information for the location of the site
and for some selected meteorological observation stations near the site.
Since the file for a specific site does all meteorological stations near the site and since the information for
meteorological stations can become outdated, the meteorological data processor provides the means to add
meteorological stations to the file or update information in the file.
6-1

--- PAGE 120 ---

The following information is needed for each meteorological station:
" A station identification. The station identification can be any 10 letter character; the release site ID is
appropriate for the first station in the station list; FAA or ICAO location indicators are appropriate for
national weather service or other stations that have them. A longer station name may be included for
each station for better identification.
* The latitude (positive north of the equator and negative south of the equator) and longitude (positive
east of the prime meridian and negative west of the prime meridian) of the station in decimal degrees.
* The elevation of the station in meters above mean sea level.
* The surface roughness for the station (in). Meteorological texts such as Panofsky and Dutton (1984)
and Stull (1988) provide guidance on estimating surface roughness. If no other information is
available, a default surface roughness of 0.2 m may be used.
* The height at which the wind measurements are made (in). The instrument height should be height
above ground level.
The meteorological data processor uses the station position to place station data at the proper location in
the modeling domain; station elevations are used in the potential flow model that adjusts wind fields for
topographic effects (Section 6.5.1), and the surface roughness and height of wind measurement are used in
calculating wind speed variation with height (Section 6.4.2).
The first station in the station file is the release point (the site). The latitude and longitude of the first
station will define the coordinates of the center of the model domain grid. Distances from the center of the
grid to the other stations are calculated using
Xrs =rA Ars COSts (6.1)
and
Yrs = reA Ors (6.2)
where
xrs = distance of the station east (+) or west (-) of the source (center of the grid) (km),
Yrs = distance of the station north (+) or south (-) of the source (center of the grid) (km),
re = radius of the earth (= 6370 km),
(p,= latitude of the center of the grid (release point),
Airs = longitude difference between the station and the source (center of the grid) (radians),
Apq, = latitude difference between the station and the source (center of the grid) (radians).
6-2

--- PAGE 121 ---

6.3 Meteorological Data Input
Station meteorological data are entered for specific dates and times. The data may be actual observations
(measurements) or they may be taken from meteorological forecasts. If available, the following data
should be entered for each station used:
* whether the data is an observation or a forecast
* the time of the data; (the program will round the time to the nearest quarter-hour. For example, an
entry of 12:07 would be changed to 12:00. Similarly, an entry of 14:22 would be changed to 14:30)
* surface-level wind speed
* surface-level wind direction
* estimated atmospheric stability
• precipitation type
* estimated mixing height (optional).
If the plume rise option is used the ambient air temperature should also be entered.
If the calculation is for a UF release, the following data should also be entered for the release point
6
(center of the grid):
* ambient air temperature
* pressure
* humidity measurement (dew point temperature, relatively humidity, or wet bulb temperature).
The air temperature is used in plume rise calculations in all three of the transport and diffusion models.
The air temperature, pressure, and humidity are used in the thermodynamic calculations in the UF plume
6
model. Pressure and humidity are used only by the UF6 plume model.
The following sections describe the meteorological variables in more detail.
6.3.1 Surface Winds
The surface winds are made up of the wind direction (the direction from which the wind is blowing) and
the wind speed. Wind directions must be entered in degrees from 0' to 3600. Wind speed can be entered
in units of m/s, mph, or knots and can range from 0 to 30 m/s (or equivalent in other units).
6.3.2 Atmospheric Stability Class
Atmospheric stability may be entered either as a stability class (A -extremely unstable through G -
extremely stable) based on the general classification scheme discussed by Pasquill (1961), Gifford
(1961), and Turner (1964) or as temperature variation with height (dT/dz). If dT/dz is entered, it will be
converted to a stability class using the conversion table shown in Table 6.1 (NRC, 1972).
6-3

--- PAGE 127 ---

The surface roughness length is associated with small-scale topographic features. It arises as a constant of
integration in the derivation of the wind profile equations and is used in several boundary-layer
relationships. Texts on atmospheric diffusion, air pollution and boundary-layer meteorology (Panofsky
and Dutton 1984, Stull 1988) contain tables that give approximate relationships between surface
roughness and land use, vegetation type, and topographic roughness.
The term Vf(z/L) accounts for the effects of stability on the wind profile. In stable atmospheric conditions,
V1(z/L) has the form -az/L where cc has a value of 5. In neutral conditions V'(z/L) is equal to zero, and the
diabatic profile simplifies to a logarithmic profile.
In unstable air, W(z/L) is more complicated. According to Panofsky and Dutton (1984), the most common
form of V'(z/L) for unstable conditions, based on the work of Businger et al. (Paulson 1970) is
y( L= nIn ( [( ] [ 2 2x)-]2tan-'(x) + (6.4)
where
x = (1-16z/L)"4.
Equation (6.4) is used to estimate the friction velocity (u.) from the wind speed, surface roughness, and
Monin-Obukhov length. In unstable and neutral conditions, the use of Eq. (6.4) is limited to the lowest
100 meters of the atmosphere. In stable conditions, the upper limit for application of Eq. (6.4) is the
smaller of 100 meters or three times the Monin-Obukhov length.
6.4.3 Mixing Height
Heating of the surface and surface friction combine to generate turbulence that mixes material released at
or near ground level through a layer that varies in thickness from a few meters to a few kilometers. This
layer is referred to as the mixing layer. The atmospheric models in RASCAL 3.0.5 use the mixing height
(also referred to as the mixing-layer depth and mixing-layer thickness) to limit vertical diffusion.
The meteorological data processor has three methods for obtaining estimates of the mixing height at
meteorological stations. The mixing height may be entered directly, or it may be estimated by the program
from either current meteorological data or climatological information. Of the latter two options, estimation
of mixing height from current meteorological data is preferable to estimating the mixing height from
climatological data, if sufficient data are available.
The meteorological data processor uses algorithms developed by Ramsdell, Simonen, and Burk (1994 ) for
estimating mixing height from current meteorological data. The algorithms are based relationships derived
by Zilitinkevich (1972) for stable and neutral conditions.
For stable atmospheric conditions, the relationship is
H = k( . (6.5)
6-9

--- PAGE 132 ---

precipitation rate zone. Each site in the RASCAL database is assigned to one of three precipitation rate
zones. The precipitation zones, originally defined in Ramsdell, Simonen, and Burk (1994) are based on
annual precipitation. Zone 1 is for areas where the annual precipitation is less than 10 inches, zone 2 is for
areas where the annual precipitation is between 10 and 20 inches, and zone 3 is for areas where the annual
precipitation exceeds 20 inches. Most existing reactor sites are assigned to precipitation rate zone 3. Some
sites in the drier regions of the United States are assigned to zone 1. Precipitation rate zone assignments
are made in the climatology database and can be modified as appropirate.
The precipitation rates assigned by the meteorological data processor are listed in Table 6.4. These rates,
based on data collected in the Pacific northwest, should be conservative for most nuclear facilities in the
United States.
Table 6.4 Precipitation Rates as a Function of Precipitation Climate Zone
Precipitation Precipitation Rate (mm/h)
Type
Zone 1 Zone 2 Zone 3
Light rain 0.4 0.6 0.7
Medium rain 3.8 3.8 3.8
Heavy rain 3.8 3.8 8.5
Light snow 0.3 0.3 0.7
Medium snow 1.7 1.7 3.8
Heavy rain 1.7 1.7 3.8
6.5 Calculating Spatially Varying Meteorological Conditions
The puff model takes into account both spatial and temporal variations in the atmospheric conditions. The
meteorological data processor provides the gridded fields of the atmospheric stability class, the inverse
Monin-Obukhov length, the east-west (U) and north-south (V) components of the wind, the mixing height,
and the precipitation type and precipitation rate for each of the three puff model domains. The following
subsections describe the preparation of the fields from the station data.
6.5.1 Wind Fields
The puff model uses wind fields to calculate movement of puffs. These are fields of U (east-west) and V
(north-south) components of the wind vector. The wind fields are created from station wind data using a
I/r2 interpolation scheme, where r is the distance from the grid point to the station. This interpolation
scheme, which was used in earlier NRC codes such as MESOI (Ramsdell, Athey, and Glantz 1983) and
MESORAD (Scherpelz, et al. 1986; Ramsdell et al. 1988), is common in spatial interpolation of the wind
fields (Hanna, Briggs, and Hosker 1982).
6-14

--- PAGE 133 ---

6.5.2 Adjustment of Wind Fields for Topography
If the meteorological stations reporting data are well placed with respect to major topographic features,
the wind fields developed by interpolation will give reasonable puff trajectories. However, with one
meteorological station or a small number of stations, the wind fields may not properly reflect the effects of
topography. The meteorological data processor includes an option to use a simple one-layer model to
adjust wind fields for topography. Wind field adjustments are greatest for stable atmospheric conditions
(E, F, and G stability classes) and least for neutral conditions (stability class D). Wind fields are not
adjusted in unstable atmospheric conditions (stability classes A, B, and C). For this purpose only,
atmospheric stability at the release point (center of the model domain) is assumed to apply to the entire
domain.
The wind-field model in RASCAL 3.0.5 is a two-dimensional adaption of the wind fitting program
described by Ross et al. (1988) that is used in the NUATMOS and MATTHEW codes. In the RASCAL
3.0.5 implementation, wind fields created by interpolation are used as the starting point in the adjustment
process. The thickness of the mixing layer is calculated for each node in the model domain by computing
the difference between the top of the boundary layer and the terrain elevation. For those nodes where the
terrain rises above the top of the boundary layer, the program assumes that the boundary-layer thickness is
0.01 meter and sets the wind to zero. This technique is simple to implement and has proven effective at
generating flows that avoid obstacles such as mountain ridges.
The initial wind field is then adjusted using methods of variational calculus to produce a non-divergent
wind field in the boundary layer, subject to the constraint of minimum difference between the initial wind
field and the adjusted wind field. The procedure for adjusting the wind field involves solving Poisson's
equation. The code uses a nine-point Laplacian operator and a simultaneous relaxation technique to obtain
the solution.
The model has been tested and shows that the winds produced by the model flow around obstacles that are
well resolved by the grid. Obstacles having width of three grid points or greater are considered well
resolved. Smaller obstacles may or may not be resolved, depending on their shape and orientation relative
to the grid. For example, a ridge one grid point wide is well resolved if it runs in the x or y direction, but if
that same ridge is at 450 to the grid, it is not resolved.
The adjusted wind field is most accurate near stations and along trajectories that pass near stations. Wind
fields are less accurate elsewhere. Thus, it is desirable to have wind data near the release point and, if
possible, at downwind locations.
Topographic data are included in RASCAL 3.0.5 for all sites in the database. Sites not included in the
RASCAL database and the generic site do not have topographic data files. Therefore, the option of
modifying wind fields for topographic effects is not available for these sites.
6.5.3 Stability and Precipitation
The stability class and precipitation fields (precipitation type and precipitation rate) are based on data for
the closest meteorological station. Fields created in this manner include stability class, inverse Monin-
Obukhov length, precipitation type, and precipitation rate. This procedure avoids averaging that would
minimize the effects of extreme stability or instability. It also provides maximum detail in treating isolated
precipitation events.
6-15

--- PAGE 139 ---

The groundshine effective exposure duration Eegn(T) for each radionuclide n is
Eeg,(T) = Ao-' JoA(t)W,(t)dt (7.3)
where
Ao = initial activity of the parent (Ci)
An(t) activity of the radionuclide n (Ci)
=
W,(t) = groundshine weathering function (dimensionless)
The activity of the parent radionuclide as a function of time is given by the usual exponential relationship
A(t) = Ao exp(- b) (7.4)
where
Ao = initial activity, and
, = decay constant (s').
Activities for daughters are given by the Bateman equations (Benedict et al. 1987) modified to be
appropriate for activity rather than atoms (Strenge 1997) and to include branching fractions. These
equations are described in Section 7.2.
The groundshine weathering function W,(t) (Anspaugh et al. 2002), based in large part on Chernobyl data,
is a sum of two exponential terms
WsV(t)= Cle-a + C e-Pt (7.5)
2
where
t = the time after deposition in days.
The first term describes the weathering during the first few years after deposition and the second term
describes long term weathering. The values of C, and C2 are 0.4 and 0.6, respectively, and the values of a
andf are 1.26x 10- d', and 3.8x 10-5 d', respectively. FRMAC has also recently adopted this weathering
function.
When Equations (7.4) and (7.5) are substituted into Equation (7.3), the resulting integral can be solved in
closed form. Equation (7.3) can also be integrated for daughters. These solutions, which are not shown
here, are used in intermediate phase groundshine dose calculations.
7-3

--- PAGE 142 ---

R, (t) = Ro / t (7.11)
where
R,, =initial resuspension factor with a default value of I0 6/m
t = time in days
When expressions for the activity and the resuspension factor are substituted into Equation 7.11, the
effective exposure cannot be calculated by closed form integration. In RASCAL, the effective exposure
duration for intermediate phase inhalation doses is estimated using numerical integration.
7.1.4 Precalculated Intermediate Phase Dose Conversion Parameters
The RASCAL database contains precalculated dose conversion parameters for groundshine, inadvertent
ingestion, and inhalation for the first 30 days, the first year, the second year, and 50 years for 219
radionuclides. The precalculated dose conversion parameters reduce computing time and facilitate
comparison with hand calculations.
7.1.5 Dose Conversion Parameter Calculations with Delayed Reentry
Dose conversion parameters for delayed reentry are calculated as the difference between the factor
without delayed reentry and the factor for the delay period. For example, the first year dose conversion
parameter for a 30-day delay in reentry is calculated as
DCP(30d to ly) = DCP(O to ly) - DCP(O to 30d) (7.12)
where
DCP(30 d to I y) = dose conversion parameter over the interval from 30 days to 1 year
DCP(O to 1 y) = dose conversion parameter for the first year
DCP(O to 30 d) = dose conversion parameter for the first 30 days
Intermediate phase dose conversion parameters for the first year D(O to I y), the second year D(J to 2 y),
and 50 years D(O to 50 y) have been precalculated. Intermediate phase dose conversion parameters for the
delay period are calculated as needed, after the delay period is defined.
7-6

--- PAGE 146 ---

The following equations describe the activity of the parent and explicit daughters as a function of time.
Given the measured activity of a radionuclide at time zero, the activities of the radionuclide and daughters,
if any, following the measurement are given by the Bateman Equations (e.g., Benedict et al. 1987),
modified to give activities (disintegrations/time) rather than number of atoms (Strenge 1997). The
Bateman Equation for the parent radionuclide is
AP(t) = Ap(O)e-A'l (7.13)
where
AP(t) = activity of the parent at time t following the measurement,
Ap(O) = measured activity, and
Ap = decay constant of the parent.
The activity of first-generation explicit daughter radionuclides, assuming none of the daughter is present
initially, is
Ad,(,) = AP(0) 2 -A-d (eA - e-Ad'I) (7.14)
where
AdN(t) = activity of the first-generation daughter at time t,
fd= fraction of disintegrations of the parent that yield the daughter
2dl = decay constant for the daughter.
This relationship applies to each first-generation daughter of the parent.
Although there may be more than one second-generation daughter for a parent radionuclide, RASCAL
assumes simplified decay chains that include, at most, a single second-generation daughter. The activity of
second-generation daughter radionuclides, assuming none of the preceding first generation daughter and
none second-generation daughter are present initially, is
Ad (t) = Ap(O)x fd, Adlf, 2d2 x
2 2
e-Ap eAd- , e--Ad2 ) (7.15)
where
Ad2(t) = activity of the second-generation daughter at time t following the measurement,
7-10

--- PAGE 147 ---

fraction of first-generation daughter disintegrations that yield the second generation daughter,
fd2 =
and
2 decay constant for the second-generation daughter.
d2 =
In the above equations, the time-dependent activities of the parent and daughters are functions of the
initial (measured) activity of the parent.
7.3 Derived Response Levels (DRLs)
A derived response level is a measurable quantity that indicates that the deposited activity could result in
an intermediate phase dose equal to one of the intermediate phase protective action guides. One type of
DRL is the closed window (gamma) dose rate in mR/hour equal to the first, second, or 50 year
intermediate phase PAG. The other DRL is the ground concentration of a marker radionuclide equivalent
to a PAG.
RASCAL computes two sets of DRLs - one set for use with measured exposure rates (meter readings), and
the other for use with measurement of the surface contamination of a marker radionuclide. In either case,
the DRLs are based on an assumed mixture of radionuclides on the surface. In RASCAL, DRLs are
computed for first year, second year, and 50 years for a range of times from 0 to 100 days since the initial
measurement.
7.3.1 Exposure Rate Derived Response Levels
The exposure rate derived response level (DRL) is the exposure rate that will occur when the ground
concentration present will cause a dose to an inhabitant that is equal to the intermediate phase protective
action guide. Thus, an exposure rate measurement survey instrument can be used to identify areas where
doses might exceed the intermediate phase protective action guides.
Exposure rate DRLs are calculated using equations developed from methods described in the FRMAC
Manual (SNL 2003). However, the RASCAL DRLs include an inadvertent ingestion component that is not
included in the FRMAC computational method. The basic equation used in RASCAL for exposure rate
DRLs is
1.429 x (C x GRFox ECFoj x 3600.)
DRLexp =PAGx (7.16)
n
(fi ýf x DCP~) + (uING x DC~i~gi) + (R,,x Vb x DCJpflhi]
where
DRLe,p derived response level for exposure. (mR/hr)
=
PAG = EPA protective action guide. (mrem)
1.429 = conversion factor from mrem to mR from EPA 1992, page 7-11
7-11