2.5.2 Dispersion Data
The rate at which materials disperse in the atmosphere depends strongly on atmospheric 
turbulence, which varies on stability class. Pasquill suggested curves for height and angular spread 
according to stability classes and extrapolated this information to 100 km. Gifford used these data 
to develop dispersion parameter curves with downwind distance for each stability class (Turner, 
1970). As modified, these curves are presented in Figure 2-3 (Gifford F. A., 1976). 57
Figure 2-3 Dependence of σy and σz on Distance for the Six Pasquill-Gifford Stability Classes (A 
Through F)
The solid lines in Figure 2-3 depict the range of the experimental data; dashed lines are 
extrapolations. Several other field studies have been conducted to develop dispersion parameter 
systems. These include studies at Brookhaven (Singer & Smith, 1966), St. Louis (McElroy & 
Pooler, 1968), and Julich Nuclear Research Center in Germany (Vogt, 1977; Bundesminister des 
Innern, 1981; Geiss, 1982; Kiefer et al., 1979). Dispersion parameter systems from these field 
studies are discussed in Section 2.3.3.2 of Till & Meyer (1983).
In the early 1990’s, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Commission of European 
Communities (CEC) conducted a series of expert elicitations to obtain distributions for uncertain 
variables used in health consequence analyses related to accidental release of nuclear material.
Harper et al. (1995) document the expert elicitation that provides a technical basis for defining the 
plume lateral and vertical dispersion for a range of stability conditions, a range of surface 
roughness corresponding to several land-use categories, and downwind distances ranging from 
500 m to 30 km.
2.5.3 Dispersion Rate Models
The dispersion parameters y and z in the Gaussian plume equations are important values that 
determine how quickly the plume disperses as it travels downwind. MACCS has two main methods 
to determine y and z. The user can choose either a power-law function or user-supplied lookup 
tables to model the dispersion parameters, both of which depend on distance and stability class. In 
addition, as an option for modeling long-range dispersion the user can switch the lateral dispersion 
z (m) y (m) Distance Downwind (km) Distance Downwind (km)58
rate from distance-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) to time-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑡) at a specified distance 
downwind.
In addition to the dispersion rate models, linear scaling factors for dispersion (YSCALE, ZSCALE) 
discussed in Section 2.5.5 and the plume meander models (PLMMOD) discussed in Section 2.5.6
can also affect dispersion. 
The rate at which materials disperse in the atmosphere depends strongly on atmospheric 
turbulence, which varies greatly with stability class. To update the dispersion rate model based on 
new atmospheric conditions, to account for the initial dispersion from a building wake, and to 
switch from distance- to time-based dispersion, MACCS uses a concept known as a “virtual source 
location” described in Section 2.5.4.
2.5.3.1 Power Law Option
The user can choose to use the power-law function by setting a value of zero to the number of 
distances defined in the lookup table option (NUM_DIST). The dispersion parameter power-law 
functions for y and z have the following forms:
𝜎𝑦𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑎𝑦𝑖 ∙ (
𝑥
𝑥0
)
𝑏𝑦𝑖
𝜎𝑧𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑎𝑧𝑖 ∙ (
𝑥
𝑥0
)
𝑏𝑧𝑖 (2-22)
Where
• 𝜎𝑦𝑖 is the lateral dispersion parameter for stability class, i, for stability classes A-F. This 
parameter is the standard deviation of a Gaussian distribution (m).
• 𝜎𝑧𝑖 is the vertical dispersion parameter for stability class, i. This parameter is the standard 
deviation of a Gaussian distribution (m).
• 𝑥 is the downwind distance (m) from the virtual source. 
• 𝑥0 is a fixed unit of length, 1 m, and ensures that the term 𝑥⁄𝑥0
is dimensionless.
• 𝑎𝑦𝑖 and 𝑎𝑧𝑖 are the linear coefficients (m) in the power-law expressions for lateral 
dispersion and vertical dispersion, respectively, for stability class, i. These values are 
specified by the input parameters CYSIGA and CZSIGA, respectively.
• 𝑏𝑦𝑖 and 𝑏𝑧𝑖 are the exponentials (dimensionless) in the power-law expressions for lateral 
dispersion and vertical dispersion, respectively, for stability class, i. These values are 
specified by the input parameters CZSIGB and CZSIGB, respectively.59
Tadmor & Gur (1969) constructed power-law fits to the Pasquill-Gifford (P-G) curves discussed 
in Section 2.5.2. NUREG-1150 and the original MACCS Sample Problem A (NRC, 1990, 
Appendix A) used these values, which are provided in Table 2-4. 
Table 2-4 Tadmor and Gur Dispersion Coefficients for Equation (2-22) for a distance range of 0.5 
to 5 km.
Stability Class 𝝈𝒚𝒊 𝝈𝒛𝒊
P-G i 𝒂𝒚𝒊 𝒃𝒚𝒊 𝒂𝒛𝒊 𝒃𝒛𝒊
A 1 0.3658 0.9031 0.00025 2.125
B 2 0.2751 0.9031 0.0019 1.6021
C 3 0.2089 0.9031 0.2 0.8543
D 4 0.1474 0.9031 0.3 0.6532
E 5 0.1046 0.9031 0.4 0.6021
F 6 0.0722 0.9031 0.2 0.6020
*The values of these constants reflect correction of typographical errors identified by Dobbins (1979).
More recently, NUREG/CR-7161 (Bixler, Clauss, & Morrow, 2013) constructed power-law fits to 
dispersion data from the NRC / CEC joint expert elicitation (Harper, et al., 1995). The SOARCA 
project (NUREG-1935; NRC, 2012) used these values, which are provided in Table 2-5:
Table 2-5 NUREG/CR-7161 Dispersion Coefficients for Equation (2-22), Median Values of 
Expert Elicitation (Bixler, Clauss, & Morrow, 2013)7
Stability Class 𝝈𝒚𝒊 𝝈𝒛𝒊
P-G i 𝒂𝒚𝒊 𝒃𝒚𝒊 𝒂𝒛𝒊 𝒃𝒛𝒊
A 1 0.7507 0.866 0.0361 1.277
B 2 0.7507 0.866 0.0361 1.277
C 3 0.4063 0.865 0.2036 0.859
D 4 0.2779 0.881 0.2636 0.751
E 5 0.2158 0.866 0.2463 0.619
F 6 0.2158 0.866 0.2463 0.619
7 Note that the same parameter values are assigned for classes A/B and for classes E/F. Use of the NUREG/CR-7161 
correlations would appear to result in effectively four stability classes: unstable (A/B), slightly unstable (C), neutral 
(D), and stable (E/F/G).60
2.5.3.2 Lookup Table Option
The lookup table option allows the user to define a lookup table as an alternative to power-law 
functions for y and z. If tracer experiments are available for a site, it may be possible to process 
the data into tables of lateral and vertical standard deviations (y and z) in this way.
To use the lookup table option, the user sets a value for the number of distances to be defined in 
the lookup table (NUM_DIST) between 3 and 50. The table requires user-defined distances and 
dispersion values. This includes lateral and vertical dispersion values (y and z) for each stability 
class (A to F), for a total of twelve dispersion values at each specified distance.
The lookup table option uses an interpolation technique known as a Hermite cubic spline as 
discussed by Kahaner, Moler, & Nash (1989). This approach avoids the numerical instabilities 
observed with other cubic spline fits. The lookup table option does not extrapolate beyond the user 
supplied distances, and instead simply uses the dispersion value of the closest distance that is 
specified in the table.
2.5.3.3 Time-Based Option
As an option for modeling long-range dispersion, the user can switch the lateral dispersion 
parameter from distance-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) (according to the power law equation or the 
lookup tables previously discussed), to time-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑡) at a certain distance 
downwind. The user can choose the time-based dispersion model by setting a value of “LRTIME”
to the parameter DISPMD. To only use the distance-based dispersion (either power law option or 
the lookup-table option), the user sets a value of “LRDIST” for the parameter DISPMD. When 
mapping dispersion onto the spatial grid, a time-based dispersion model updates dispersion when 
a change in windspeed occurs, whereas a distance-based dispersion updates dispersion when a 
change in stability class occurs.
Time-based dispersion requires the user to select the downwind distance at which the code 
switches from distance-based dispersion to time-based dispersion (CYDIST). The user must also 
select a linear coefficient, 𝑎𝑐
, for the time-based dispersion model (CYCOEF). The default value 
for the time-based linear coefficient and the transition distance are 0.5 m/s and 30 km, respectively, 
based on a recommendation by Hanna (2002). The virtual source concept (as discussed in Section
2.5.4) is used to ensure that there is no discontinuity in switching from distance- to time-based 
dispersion.
When the user implements power law option at close distances, the following equation describes 
the switch from distance-based dispersion to time-based dispersion: 
𝜎𝑦 = {
𝑎 (
𝑥
𝑥0
)
𝑏
𝑥 < 𝑥𝑐
𝑎𝑐
𝑡 𝑥 ≥ 𝑥𝑐
(2-23)
Where 
• 𝜎𝑦 is the lateral dispersion parameter (m) in the crosswind direction,61
• a is the linear coefficient (m) for distance-based lateral dispersion for a given stability 
class,
• b is the exponent (dimensionless) for distance-based lateral dispersion for a given 
stability class,
• 𝑎𝑐
is the linear coefficient for time-based lateral dispersion (m/s), specified by the input 
parameter CYCOEF,
• 𝑥0 is unity (m) used to make the term 𝑥/𝑥0 dimensionless, 
• 𝑥𝑐
is the distance from the source (m) at which the use of the lateral dispersion model 
switches from distance- to time-based, specified by the input parameter CYDIST,
• 𝑥 is the downwind distance from the virtual source (m), and
• t is the time since the plume was released from the virtual source (s).
Alternatively, the user can implement a lookup table for distances less than CYDIST.
When the time-based dispersion model is enabled, time-based dispersion is implemented at 
distances greater than or equal to 𝑥𝑐 as shown in Equation (2-23). However, distance-based 
dispersion is always applied within the first ring, regardless of the value of CYDIST. 
Hanna (2002) recommends that dispersion beyond 30 km be based on time rather than distance. 
The time-based dispersion option allows the user to implement Hanna’s recommendation, and the 
time-based dispersion model is closer to the treatment used in some Gaussian puff codes. The basis 
for the recommended distance, 30 km, is that the expert elicitation only considered distances as far 
as 30 km (Harper, et al., 1995) and that several Gaussian puff codes switch to time-based 
dispersion at about 30 or 40 km (Draxler & Hess, 1997). The distances required to model 
consequences for a nuclear reactor accident can extend considerably farther than 30 km, a 
minimum of 80 km. 
2.5.4 Virtual Source Calculation
The dispersion rate models use a concept known as a “virtual” source location. A virtual source 
location is a release point at a hypothetical upwind location. The location of this virtual source 
depends on the dispersion rate model and is based on the dispersion at a specific plume location.
With these boundary conditions, the dispersion rate models can calculate downwind lateral 
dispersion (y) and vertical dispersion (z) according to the downwind distance (x; or release time 
[t]) from the virtual source location. The downwind distance (x) and release time (t) from the 
virtual source location are used only to calculate downwind dispersion. Plume locations are always 
expressed relative to the release point, which is the center point of the polar-coordinate 
computational grid. The virtual source location is generally different for σy and σz.
MACCS uses these boundary conditions and the associated virtual source location for several 
different purposes. One purpose is to update dispersion based on changing atmospheric conditions.62
The distance-based dispersion parameters 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) and 𝜎𝑧
(𝑥) depend on stability class, and the 
stability class changes discretely as the plume travels downwind. As such, MACCS allows the rate 
of plume expansion to also change discretely according to the updated atmospheric conditions, in 
a piecewise continuous fashion.
In order to maintain the correct amount of plume dispersion when changing from one set of 
atmospheric conditions to the next, MACCS calculates a new virtual source location. See Figure 
2-4 for a representation of this piecewise continuous dispersion of the plume.
Figure 2-4 Growth of y During Three Time Periods Characterized by Different Atmospheric 
Stabilities i, j, and k
MACCS also uses the virtual source location concept to estimate dispersion after building wake 
effects from the initial release. The initial plume height (SIGZINIT) and plume width (SIGYINIT) 
caused by building wake are user inputs. These initial plume dimensions at a downwind distance 
of zero meters act as the boundary conditions for calculating the virtual source location.
Another example of where MACCS uses a virtual source term is to switch from a distance-based 
dispersion parameter 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) to time-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑡). Like the changes in atmospheric 
conditions, the switch to time-based dispersion is a discrete change. The boundary condition for 
the virtual source location is the specific amount of plume dispersion (previously determined by 
one of the distance-based dispersion models) at a user specified downwind location (CYDIST).
From this boundary condition, the time-based dispersion model calculates downwind dispersion 
based on the time (t) relative to the time it was released from the virtual source. Lateral dispersion 
𝜎𝑦
(𝑡) does not depend on the stability class, and so after a switch to time-based dispersion, the 
virtual source time is constant. Note, however, that time-based dispersion is not constant with 63
distance when there are changes in windspeed. Therefore, the plume shape over the spatial grid 
can appear to have discrete changes like those shown in Figure 2-4, although for a different reason.
The following shows how MACCS uses the power law option for calculating the new source 
distances (i.e., the downwind distances from the virtual source) based on a change in stability class.
Let i be the stability class before the change in atmospheric conditions and 𝑥𝑦𝑖 and 𝑥𝑧𝑖 be the source 
distances under the original conditions (i.e., the downwind distances to the virtual source just 
before the stability class changes). Let j be the stability class after the change, and 𝑥𝑦𝑗 and 𝑥𝑧𝑗 be 
the virtual source distances under the updated conditions. To ensure continuity, 𝜎𝑦𝑖 must be equal 
to 𝜎𝑦𝑗 and 𝜎𝑧𝑖 must be equal to 𝜎𝑧𝑗 at the transition. Thus,
𝑎𝑖(𝑥𝑦𝑖
)
𝑏𝑖 = 𝜎𝑦𝑖 = 𝜎𝑦𝑗 = 𝑎𝑗 (𝑥𝑦𝑗
)
𝑏𝑗
𝑐𝑖(𝑥𝑧𝑖
)
𝑑𝑖 = 𝜎𝑧𝑖 = 𝜎𝑧𝑗 = 𝑐𝑗 (𝑥𝑧𝑗
)
𝑑𝑗
(2-24)
These equations can be solved explicitly for the new virtual source distance to produce the 
following result:
𝑥𝑦𝑗 = (
𝜎𝑦𝑖
𝑎𝑗
)
1
𝑏𝑗
= [
1
𝑎𝑗
𝑎𝑖(𝑥𝑦𝑖
)
𝑏𝑖
]
1
𝑏𝑗
𝑥𝑧𝑗 = (
𝜎𝑧𝑖
𝑐𝑗
)
1
𝑑𝑗
= [
1
𝑐𝑗
𝑐𝑖(𝑥𝑧𝑖
)
𝑑𝑖
]
1
𝑑𝑗
(2-25)
This same approach can be used in conjunction with the lookup table option described above. For 
this option, calculating the virtual source distances and the dispersion parameter values use the 
same lookup tables and interpolation methods. The ability to calculate the virtual source distance 
assumes that the inverse functional dependence for the lookup table can be evaluated, i.e., that 
given a dispersion value, a unique value of x can be determined. To ensure uniqueness, MACCS 
requires the tables to have monotonically increasing values.
2.5.5 Dispersion Scaling Factors
MACCS has scaling factors that act as multipliers on 𝜎𝑦 and 𝜎𝑧
. The user can change the lateral 
scaling factor (YSCALE) to linearly decrease or increase the amount of lateral plume dispersion 
(𝜎𝑦), and likewise can change vertical scaling factor (ZSCALE) to linearly decrease or increase 
the amount of vertical plume dispersion (𝜎𝑧
).
These scaling factors can help account for phenomena that would tend to increase or decrease the 
plume dimensions. Two such phenomena that are commonly included in plume modeling are
plume broadening caused by meander (wind direction fluctuations) and increased vertical 
spreading caused by the surface roughness of terrain. MACCS has separate models for plume 
meander, as described in Section 2.5.6. As such, the lateral scaling factor is usually set to 1.0.64
However, MACCS does not contain a separate model to account for surface roughness, so users 
commonly modify the vertical scale factor for each site.
The surface roughness of terrain causes increased turbulence and increased vertical dispersion.
The dispersion rate model data are from field experiments (e.g., Prairie Grass experiment) or other 
sources with an associated surface roughness. However, the terrain near nuclear power plants 
typically have a greater surface roughness length than those for field experiments and therefore 
have more vertical dispersion. Hanna, Briggs, & Hosker (1982, p. 29) estimates that the increase 
in vertical dispersion is proportional to the surface roughness with an exponential factor of “q,” 
where the exponent q is a constant that is typically a value of 0.2, but can range from 0.10 to 2.5.
As such, users usually account for the increased amount of vertical dispersion by calculating a 
value for ZSCALE based on the following relationship:
𝑍𝑆𝐶𝐴𝐿𝐸 = (
𝑧0
𝑧0,𝑟𝑒𝑓)
𝑞
= (
𝑧0
3 𝑐𝑚
)
0.2
(2-26)
Where
• ZSCALE is the linear scaling coefficient for vertical dispersion.
• 𝑧0,𝑟𝑒𝑓 is a reference surface roughness. This should be the surface roughness associated 
with the data underlying the dispersion rate model, which is 3 cm if the data are from the 
Prairie Grass experiments.
• 𝑧0 is the surface roughness (cm) of the terrain within a few kilometers of the release.
• 𝑞 is an exponential factor that relates surface roughness to vertical dispersion, typically 
a value of 0.2.
Figure 2-5 presents some approximate surface roughness lengths for different land uses based on 
the values in (Lettau, 1969; Briggs, 1984; Randerson, 1984).