2.4 Atmospheric Release
2.4.1 Wake Effects
MACCS does not directly model building wake effects. Instead, if there is building wake, it is up 
to the user to specify the initial plume width (SIGYINIT) and height (SIGZINIT) of the gaussian 
plume segments that are emitted from building wakes. The initial plume dimensions must be larger 
than 0.1 meters. To incorporate the initial plume dimensions into the Gaussian plume equations, 
MACCS treats this initial dispersion by means of a virtual release point upwind of the actual 
release location. See Section 2.5.4 for more information.
One method to estimate the building wake dimensions from a ground-level release in the middle 
of a downwind face of a building is to assume that 10% of the plume centerline concentrations 
exist at the building edges and roofline, which corresponds to 2.15 standard deviations from the 
plume centerline. Assuming that this method is reasonable for most releases, users commonly 
estimate the initial plume dimensions with the following relationship:
𝜎𝑦,𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 =
𝑊𝑏
4.3
and 𝜎𝑧,𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 =
𝐻𝑏
2.15 (2-5)47
Where 
• 𝜎𝑦,𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 is the initial plume width (SIGYINIT),
• 𝜎𝑧,𝑖𝑛𝑖𝑡 is the initial plume height (SIGZINIT),
• 𝑊𝑏 is the width (m) of the building from which release occurs, and
• 𝐻𝑏 is the height (m) of the building from which release occurs.
2.4.2 Plume Rise
Plume segments that are hot (contain appreciable sensible heat) or that contain gases that are less 
dense than the surrounding atmosphere are buoyant and may rise to heights much greater than their 
initial release height. However, plume liftoff depends on both the buoyancy flux and the height of 
the building, and it may not occur if the prevailing windspeed at the time of release exceeds a 
critical windspeed.
If a plume is not captured within a building wake (i.e., if liftoff occurs), the amount of plume rise 
depends on the initial atmospheric conditions of the plume segment during release. MACCS 
models plume rise until it is terminated by any of the following conditions:
• When the plume reaches its final amount of rise ∆ℎ𝑓, which depends on atmospheric 
conditions and is defined below.
• When the height of the plume centerline reaches the mixing height (height of the capping 
inversion layer).
• When one hour has elapsed since release of the plume segment began.
To calculate the amount of plume rise, MACCS has two alternative plume rise models known as 
the “improved” plume rise model and the “original” plume rise model, both of which are based on 
the work of Briggs.
5 For both models, the amount of plume rise also depends on the stability class
and other factors described in more detail below in Section 2.4.2.2.
The improved plume rise model is recommended over the original MACCS plume rise model 
based on benchmarking analyses with a mechanistic model (the ALOFT-FT code created by 
NIST). The improved plume rise model is much closer to matching the mechanistic model than 
the original MACCS plume rise model. The user can select the improved Briggs model by setting 
the MACCS variable BRGSMD to a value of “IMPROVED.”
Both the original and improved plume rise models reflect buoyancy effects but not momentum 
effects. If momentum effects are important, such as for an explosive release, users may instead be 
able to specify initial plume dimensions (SIGZINIT, SIGYINIT) for the scenario.
5 An unusual aspect of the two plume rise models is that the recommended “improved” plume rise model was published 
earlier than the “original” model that is no longer recommended. Usually, more recent work represents an 
improvement over previous work.48
2.4.2.1 Plume Liftoff
When wind speeds are high, a buoyant plume segment that is released into a building wake is 
unable to escape from the wake. In MACCS, escape of a buoyant plume segment from a building 
wake is governed by a liftoff criterion that was originally proposed by Briggs (1973) and validated 
by experiments performed at the Warren Spring Laboratory in Great Britain (Hall & Waters, 1986). 
The criterion states that plume rise occurs only when the wind speed upon release of the segment 
is less than a critical wind speed 𝑢𝑐
that is calculated using the following formula:
𝑢𝑐 = (
9.09𝐹
𝐻𝑏
)
1
3
(2-6)
Where
• Hb is the height (m) of the building from which the plume escapes (BUILDH), and
• F is the buoyancy flux (m
4
/s3
) of the plume segment, as calculated below in Section 2.4.2.3.
While the value 9.09 is fixed in the code, MACCS has a linear scaling factor (SCLCRW) that acts 
as a multiplier on the critical wind speed. The user can change SCLCRW to make liftoff more or 
less likely.
According to the plume liftoff criterion, there is little possibility of plume liftoff due to sensible 
heat when the release rate is less than 100 kW for a typical, 50-m high, reactor or containment 
building. When the rate of release of sensible heat is 1 MW, the plume only lifts off when wind 
speed is less than approximately 1.2 m/s. Larger release rates of sensible heat, like 10 MW, produce 
lift off under most weather conditions and sites.
2.4.2.2 Plume Rise Equations
MACCS models plume rise when the plume liftoff criterion is met. If plume rise occurs, plume 
rise also depends on atmospheric stability. Unlike dispersion rate models, plume rise models
assume atmospheric stability and windspeed do not vary once release of the plume segment 
reference location begins.
There are two plume rise models. The user can choose the improved model by giving the MACCS 
parameter BRGSMD a value of “IMPROVED” or can choose the original model by BRGSMD a 
value of “ORIGINAL.” Both models treat plume rise using formulae for a buoyant plume.
Two major characteristics of plume rise are the plume trajectory during plume rise, ∆ℎ(𝑥), and the 
final amount of plume rise, ∆ℎ𝑓, both of which are defined relative to the initial release height 
(PLHITE). Both models define the final amount of plume rise, ∆ℎ𝑓, and in most cases, the models 
also define the plume rise trajectory, ∆ℎ(𝑥). The exception is the original Briggs model, which
does not model a plume rise trajectory for stable atmospheric conditions (stability class E or F).
Instead, the model assumes that the plume reaches its final amount of rise when it begins to travel 
downwind. Under stable conditions, the actual plume rise trajectory likely occurs quickly relative 
to its downwind transport and its trajectory is unlikely to significantly impact downwind doses. 49
When MACCS models plume trajectory ∆ℎ(𝑥), it uses the Briggs “two-thirds law” for bent-over 
plumes (Hanna, Briggs, & Hosker, 1982):
∆ℎ(𝑥) =
1.6𝐹
1
3𝑥
2
3
𝑢
Briggs improved model: Any stability class 
Briggs original model: Stability class A-D (2-7)
where 
• ∆ℎ(𝑥) is the plume rise (m), as measured from the initial release height (PLHITE),
• x is downwind distance (m),
• F is the buoyancy flux (m
4
/s3
) of the plume segment, as calculated below in 
Section 2.4.2.3,
• 𝑢 is the wind speed (m/s) averaged between the initial release height and the final 
centerline height (ℎ𝑓), which is discussed below in Section 2.4.2.4
MACCS assumes plumes do not penetrate the boundary mixing layer. If the final plume centerline 
height is calculated to be higher than the mixing layer, or if plume rise continues after one hour, 
MACCS truncates plume rise before it reaches the final rise height determined in the plume rise 
models.
For unstable or neutral atmospheric conditions (stability classes A-D), the MACCS improved
plume rise model determines the amount of plume rise using the following formulae based on the 
work of Briggs (1970):
∆ℎ𝑓 =
{
 
 
38.7 ∙ 𝐹
0.6
𝑢
𝑖𝑓 𝐹 ≥ 55 𝑚4
𝑠
3 ⁄
21.4 ∙ 𝐹
0.75
𝑢
𝑖𝑓 𝐹 < 55 𝑚4
𝑠
3 ⁄
(2-8)
In the original MACCS plume rise model, the following equation determines the amount of plume
rise for stability classes A through D (Briggs, 1975):
∆ℎ𝑓 =
300𝐹
𝑢
3
(2-9)
While the values 38.7, 21.4, and 300 are fixed in the code, MACCS has a linear scaling factor 
(SCLADP) for the plume rise under unstable and neutrally stable conditions (stability classes AD)
that acts as a multiplier on the final plume rise, ∆ℎ𝑓. The user can change SCLADP to decrease 
or increase the final amount of plume rise, assuming that plume rise is not limited by either the 
mixing layer height or by the one-hour limit. 
Use of the SCLADP parameter for plume rise under neutral or unstable conditions is appropriate 
with the MACCS original plume rise model, in which final plume rise under neutral or stable 
conditions is proportional to 𝐹
𝑢
3 (cf., Equation 80 of Briggs [1975]), where the leading coefficient 50
can vary from 200 to 400, and for which the original MACCS plume rise model assumes a value 
of 300 based on the discussion in Section 5.1 of Briggs (1975). When using the original MACCS 
plume rise model, a scale factor from 0.36 to 1.8 results in a range of about 100 to 500 for the 
leading coefficient.
When atmospheric conditions are stable (stability classes E or F), the amount of plume rise, ∆ℎ𝑓,
in the improved Briggs model depends on the downwind distance 𝑥𝑓 where the plume is expected 
to reach its final rise height, which in turn depends on the buoyancy flux F. The plume rise ∆ℎ𝑓
during stable conditions in the improved Briggs model is the following:
∆ℎ𝑓 =
{
 
 
 
 
2.4 (
𝐹
𝑢𝑆
)
1
3
𝑖𝑓 𝑥𝑓 > 1.84
𝑢̄
√𝑆
Equation (𝟐-𝟖) 𝑖𝑓 𝑥𝑓 ≤ 1.84
𝑢̄
√𝑆
(2-10)
Where
𝑥𝑓 = {
119 ∙ 𝐹
0.4
𝑖𝑓 𝐹 ≥ 55 𝑚4
𝑠
3 ⁄
49 ∙ 𝐹
0.625 𝑖𝑓 𝐹 < 55 𝑚4
𝑠
3 ⁄
(2-11)
And where 
• ∆ℎ𝑓 is the final amount of plume rise (m), starting from the initial release height (PLHITE),
• F is the buoyancy flux (m
4
/s3
) of the plume segment, as calculated below in Section 2.4.2.3,
• 𝑢 is the wind speed (m/s) averaged between the initial release height and centerline height 
(h), which is also calculated below in Section 2.4.2.4, 
• S is the stability parameter (s
-2
), which is fixed in the MACCS code (5.04  10-4
s
-2
for 
stability class E and 1.27  10-3
s
-2
for stability class F) and is also calculated later in Section 
2.4.2.5, and 
• 𝑥𝑓 is the downwind distance (m) where the plume reaches its final rise height.
When the downwind distance where the plume levels off is small (i.e., 𝑥𝑓 ≤ 1.84 𝑢
√𝑆
), MACCS 
assumes the plume behaves identically to the improved Briggs model for unstable conditions in 
Equation (2-8). When 𝑥𝑓 > 1.84 𝑢
√𝑆
, which is the more likely case for stable atmospheric 51
conditions, MACCS models plume rise according to formula shown in Equation (2-10) based on 
the work of Briggs (Hanna, Briggs, & Hosker, 1982)6
. 
In the MACCS original Briggs model, during stable atmospheric conditions (stability class E or 
F), MACCS models plume rise using a single, slightly modified version of the previous equation:
∆ℎ𝑓 = 2.6 (
𝐹
𝑢𝑆
)
1
3
(2-12)
While the values 2.4 and 2.6 are fixed in the code, MACCS has a linear scaling factor (SCLEFP) 
for the plume rise under stable (stability classes E or F) conditions that acts as a multiplier on the 
amount of plume rise, ∆ℎ𝑓. Briggs (1975) reports that the leading coefficient for plume rise under 
stable conditions can range from 1.8 (less plume rise) to 3.4 (more plume rise). With a base value 
of 2.4 for the improved model, this translates to a range for SCLEFP of 0.75 to 1.4.
2.4.2.3 Buoyancy Flux
Buoyancy flux is an important value that MACCS uses to calculate the plume liftoff, plume 
trajectory, and the final amount of plume rise. MACCS has two methods to calculate the buoyancy 
flux F, which are named the “Power Model,” and the “Density and Flow Model.” The user can 
select the “Power Model” by setting the MACCS variable PLMMOD to a value of “HEAT”. In 
the Power Model, MACCS calculates buoyancy flux F from the sensible heat release rate 𝑄̇
(PLHEAT). The buoyancy flux F is related to the sensible heat release rate 𝑄̇ according to the 
following formula (Briggs G. A., 1965):
𝐹 =
𝑔
𝜋𝐶𝑝𝜌𝑎𝑇𝑎
𝑄̇
(2-13)
Where 
• F is the buoyancy flux (m
4
/s3
) of the plume segment
• 𝑔 is acceleration due to gravity (9.8 m/s2
)
• 𝐶𝑝 is specific heat of air at constant pressure at ambient temperature and pressure (1.005 
kJ/kg-K) 
• 𝜌𝑎 is density of air at ambient temperature and pressure (1.178 kg/m3
) 
• 𝑇𝑎 is ambient temperature (300 K)
• 𝑄̇ is sensible heat release rate (watts) of a plume segment, as given by the parameter 
PLHEAT
6 Note that although MACCS uses a coefficient of 2.4, there are a number of different values for the value of the 
leading coefficient. Briggs (1970) Equation 4 gives a value of 2.9. Table 4 of Briggs (1975) shows a range of values 
from 1.8 to 3.4 and recommends a value of 2.6, which is the value recommended in Equation 2-19 of Hanna, Briggs, 
& Hosker (1982). This is the value used in the MACCS2 1.12 original plume rise model. Because the amount of plume 
rise is linear with respect to the leading coefficient, adopting the more common coefficient would result in a slight 
increase in plume rise.52
MACCS assumes standard atmospheric conditions (i.e., 300 K and 1 atm) for the buoyancy flux.
As such, the buoyancy flux simplifies to the following:
𝐹 = 8.79  10−6
∙ 𝑄̇ (2-14)
Where the coefficient of 8.79  10-6
is fixed in the code. Alternatively, the “Density and Flow 
Model” can calculate the buoyancy flux F from the density (PLMDEN) and mass flow rate 
(PLMFLO) of the release. The user can select this model by setting the MACCS variable 
PLMMOD to a value of “DENSITY.” In this model, MACCS calculates the buoyancy flux F with 
the following formula:
𝐹 =
𝑔
𝜋
[1 −
𝜌
𝜌𝑎
]
𝑚̇
𝜌
(2-15)
Where 
• 𝜌 is the density of the plume segment (kg/m3
), as given by the parameter PLMDEN,
• 𝑚̇ is the mass flow rate of the plume segment (kg/s), as given by the parameter PLMFLO,
and
• 𝜌𝑎 and 𝑔 are the same as before.
Unlike the Power Model, this method is also able to account for the release of gases that are less 
dense than air, such as hydrogen and steam.
2.4.2.4 Average Windspeed
Average windspeed is an important value that MACCS uses to calculate both near-field plume 
trajectory and the final amount of plume rise. Since windspeeds generally increase with altitude, 
if the plume rise models were to use surface windspeeds they would overestimate plume rise and 
produce nonconservative ground-level concentrations near the source. Since this could produce a 
significant underestimation of radiation exposures, for purposes of calculating plume rise, MACCS 
uses a windspeed averaged between the windspeed at the point of release and the windspeed at the 
final plume centerline height. The windspeed as a function of height is represented as follows
(Hanna, Briggs, & Hosker, 1982):
𝑢 = 𝑢0 (
ℎ
ℎ′)
𝑝
(2-16)
where
• 𝑢 the windspeed (m/s) at the height h,
• 𝑢0 is the surface windspeed (m/s), as provided by the weather data and usually represents 
a 10-m election above ground level, 
• ℎ′ is a reference height of 10 m, which is fixed in the code, and
• 𝑝 is a dimensionless parameter that varies with stability class and surface roughness as 
shown in Table 2-3.53
Because the maximum intended value of h in Equation (2-16) is 200 m, MACCS assumes that
windspeeds higher than 200 m are uniform. While Table 2-3 shows values for both urban and rural 
surfaces, MACCS only uses p values based on rural surfaces, which are fixed in the code. 
Table 2-3 Estimates of the Exponent p in Equation (2-16) for Six Stability Classes and Two 
Surface Roughnesses (Hanna, Briggs, & Hosker, 1982)
Stability Class A B C D E F
Urban Surfaces 0.15 0.15 0.20 0.25 0.40 0.60
Rural Surfaces 0.07 0.07 0.10 0.15 0.35 0.55
To calculate the final plume height ∆ℎ𝑓
(𝑢) in Equations (2-8), (2-9), (2-10), or (2-12), MACCS 
calculates an average value of 𝑢 in three steps:
(1). MACCS first makes a first-order estimate of the final centerline height ℎ𝑓 just using 
the surface windspeed 𝑢0 and the equation for ∆ℎ𝑓, that is, ℎ𝑓,1 = ℎ0 + ∆ℎ𝑓
(𝑢0
) where 
ℎ0 is the initial release height of the plume segment (PLHITE).
(2). Then MACCS calculates the windspeed 𝑢1 at the height ℎ𝑓,1 using Equation (2-16).
(3). Finally, MACCS estimates an average windspeed 𝑢 over this range by averaging 𝑢0
and 𝑢1 [i.e., (𝑢0 + 𝑢1)/2 ], which are the windspeeds at heights ℎ0 and ℎ𝑓,1.
Using the average windspeed 𝑢 from this process, the MACCS calculates both the plume rise 
trajectory ∆ℎ(𝑥) shown in Equation (2-7) and the final plume height ∆ℎ𝑓
(𝑢) shown in either 
Equation (2-8), (2-9), (2-10), or (2-12), depending on the stability class and the selected plume rise 
model.
2.4.2.5 Stability Parameter
The stability parameter, S, is defined as the following:
𝑆 =
𝑔
𝑇𝑎
(
𝜕𝑇𝑎
𝜕𝑧 +
𝑔
𝑐𝑝
) (2-17)
where 
• g is the acceleration due to gravity (9.8 m/s2
), 
• 𝑇𝑎 is the ambient temperature (288 K), 
• 𝜕𝑇𝑎⁄𝜕𝑧 is the ambient temperatures lapse rate (K/m), 
• 𝐶𝑝 is the specific heat of air at constant pressure (1.005 kJ/kg-K), and 
• 𝑔⁄𝐶𝑝 is the dry adiabatic lapse rate (0.98 K/100 m)54
The midpoint of the temperature lapse rates 𝜕𝑇𝑎⁄𝜕𝑧 are 0.5 K/100 m for stability class E, and 
2.75 K/100 m for stability class F (Regulatory Guide 1.23 [NRC, 2007]). Therefore, the stability 
parameters S for stability classes E and F are 5.04  10-4
s
-2
and 1.27  10-3
s
-2
, respectively. These 
values are fixed in the MACCS code.
2.5 Atmospheric Dispersion
During downwind transport (x-direction), atmospheric turbulence causes plume segments to 
expand laterally (y-direction) and vertically (z-direction) relative to the plume direction. Vertical 
expansion of the plume is increased by surface roughness and is constrained by the ground and by 
the temperature structure of the atmosphere (i.e., location of inversion layers). Lateral expansion 
of the plume may be increased from its centerline trajectory by fluctuations in wind direction called 
plume meander and is unconstrained along the y-direction.
MACCS models plume dispersion during downwind transport using a straight-line Gaussian 
plume segment model. Gaussian plume dispersion assumes that during its downwind transport, the 
air concentration of gas molecules and aerosol particles can be modeled as a random walk that 
generates a normal distribution. Even though plume segments cannot change direction after they 
have been released, the gaussian model is useful because it is simple and computationally efficient.
The Gaussian plume equations require two spatially dependent dispersion parameters, 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) and 
𝜎𝑧
(𝑥), to estimate the atmospheric dispersion. These dispersion parameters are the standard 
deviations of gaussian distribution in the lateral and vertical directions and thereby determine the 
shape of the plume. The Gaussian plume equations do not consider dispersion in the downwind 
x-direction. 
For the purpose of calculating lateral and vertical dispersion, MACCS treats the plume segment as 
being located entirely at its reference location (REFTIM), which is a fixed point along the length 
of the plume segment specified by the user. As such, MACCS does not calculate a time-varying 
air concentration at an arbitrary location (𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) during plume passage. Instead, the passage of 
the reference location is used to calculate the entire time-integrated air concentration 𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧). 
The user can choose to model the lateral and vertical dispersion parameters either according to a 
power-law model or based on user-supplied lookup tables, both of which depend on stability class
and downwind distance. As an option to model long-range dispersion, the user can also implement 
a time-based dispersion model for lateral dispersion after a specified distance downwind.
2.5.1 Gaussian Plume Equations
The Gaussian plume equations describe the lateral and vertical profile of a plume segment.
MACCS assumes that the dispersion of the plume forms a normal distribution in both of these 
directions, where the lateral dispersion parameter (𝜎𝑦) defines the shape in the crosswind direction 
and the vertical dispersion parameter (𝜎𝑧) defines the shape in the vertical direction. When not 
constrained by the ground or by inversion layers, the Gaussian plume equation has the following 
form (Turner, 1970):55
𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) =
𝑄
𝑢
∙ 𝑓𝐺
(𝑦) ∙ 𝑓𝐺
(𝑧 − ℎ)
𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧)
=
𝑄
𝑢
∙
1
√2𝜋𝜎𝑦
(𝑥)
𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−
1
2
(
𝑦
𝜎𝑦
(𝑥)
)
2
]∙
1
√2𝜋𝜎𝑧
(𝑥)
𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−
1
2
(
𝑧 − ℎ
𝜎𝑧
(𝑥)
)
2
]
(2-18)
Where
• 𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) is the time-integrated air concentration (Bq∙s/m3
) at downwind location 
(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧),
• 𝑄 is the activity (Bq) entering the spatial element. The released activity 𝑄0 for a plume 
segment is the product of RELFRC and CORINV, modified by CORSCA,
• u is the windspeed (m/s), as given by the weather data,
• 𝑓𝐺
(𝑦) is the Gaussian distribution (m
-1
) representing lateral dispersion,
• 𝑓𝐺
(𝑧 − ℎ) is the Gaussian distribution (m
-1
) representing vertical dispersion, with a 
centerline height h,
• h is the height of the plume centerline (m), as determined by the plume rise equations
discussed in Section 2.4.2.
• 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) is the lateral dispersion parameter representing one standard deviation of the
Gaussian distribution (m), and
• 𝜎𝑧
(𝑥) is the vertical dispersion parameter representing one standard deviation of the
Gaussian distribution (m).
The lateral and vertical dispersion parameters (σy and σz) are calculated by the user-selected 
dispersion rate model, discussed in Section 2.5.3. MACCS does not use Equation (2-18) because 
it allows for infinite expansion in the vertical direction. Instead, MACCS replaces the boundless 
Gaussian distribution in the vertical direction with a distribution that is constrained by the ground 
and the capping inversion layer, as shown in Equation (2-19): 
𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) =
𝑄
𝑢
∙ 𝑓𝐺(𝑦) ∙ 𝜓(𝑧) for 𝑧 ∈ [0, 𝐻]
(2-19)
and where
• 𝜓(𝑧) is a vertical distribution (m
-1
) of the plume segment discussed below,
• H is the height (m) of the capping inversion layer (i.e., the height of the mixing layer), and
• 𝑄, u, and 𝑓𝐺(𝑦) are the same as before.56
At short distances, MACCS treats the vertical distribution 𝜓(𝑧) as being a Gaussian distribution, 
but accounts for the ground and the inversion layer as vertically bounding by treating them as 
reflecting boundaries. In this case, MACCS approximates the Gaussian distribution (m
-1
) in the 
vertical direction between [0, 𝐻] using the following equation:
𝜓(𝑧) =
1
√2𝜋𝜎𝑧
∑ {𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−
1
2
(
𝑧 − ℎ + 2𝑛𝐻
𝜎𝑧
)
2
]
100
𝑛=−100
+ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−
1
2
(
𝑧 + ℎ + 2𝑛𝐻
𝜎𝑧
)
2
]}
(2-20)
MACCS uses the summation from -100 to +100 to approximate infinite reflections. MACCS uses 
Equation (2-20) from the time of release until the plume segment is well-mixed between the ground 
and inversion layer (i.e., uniform in the vertical direction). Once the plume segment is well-mixed, 
MACCS has the vertical distribution 𝜓(𝑧) transition from Equation (2-20) to a uniform 
distribution:
𝜓(𝑧) =
1
𝐻
 for 𝑧 ∈ [0, 𝐻]
(2-21)
MACCS assumes deposition to the ground does not affect the shape of either vertical distribution. 
At each radial interval along the plume's trajectory, MACCS tests for a well-mixed vertical 
distribution according to 𝐻
𝜎𝑧
< 0.03. This criterion occurs when Equations (2-20) and (2-21) agree
to within approximately 1%. When this criterion is met, MACCS switches the vertical distribution 
𝜓(𝑧) from Equation (2-20) to Equation (2-21). Because Equation (2-21) is independent of 𝜎𝑧
, 
MACCS ceases to calculate 𝜎𝑧 after this transition.
In Section 2.7.2, MACCS uses Equation (2-19) to calculate dry deposition. In Section 2.8, MACCS 
uses Equation (2-19) to calculate the time-integrated centerline air concentrations 𝜒(𝑧 = ℎ̅)
𝑗
and 
ground-level air concentration 𝜒(𝑧 = 0)𝑗
for radial interval j. See these sections for more 
information.
2.5.2 Dispersion Data
The rate at which materials disperse in the atmosphere depends strongly on atmospheric 
turbulence, which varies on stability class. Pasquill suggested curves for height and angular spread 
according to stability classes and extrapolated this information to 100 km. Gifford used these data 
to develop dispersion parameter curves with downwind distance for each stability class (Turner, 
1970). As modified, these curves are presented in Figure 2-3 (Gifford F. A., 1976). 57
Figure 2-3 Dependence of σy and σz on Distance for the Six Pasquill-Gifford Stability Classes (A 
Through F)
The solid lines in Figure 2-3 depict the range of the experimental data; dashed lines are 
extrapolations. Several other field studies have been conducted to develop dispersion parameter 
systems. These include studies at Brookhaven (Singer & Smith, 1966), St. Louis (McElroy & 
Pooler, 1968), and Julich Nuclear Research Center in Germany (Vogt, 1977; Bundesminister des 
Innern, 1981; Geiss, 1982; Kiefer et al., 1979). Dispersion parameter systems from these field 
studies are discussed in Section 2.3.3.2 of Till & Meyer (1983).
In the early 1990’s, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission and the Commission of European 
Communities (CEC) conducted a series of expert elicitations to obtain distributions for uncertain 
variables used in health consequence analyses related to accidental release of nuclear material.
Harper et al. (1995) document the expert elicitation that provides a technical basis for defining the 
plume lateral and vertical dispersion for a range of stability conditions, a range of surface 
roughness corresponding to several land-use categories, and downwind distances ranging from 
500 m to 30 km.
2.5.3 Dispersion Rate Models
The dispersion parameters y and z in the Gaussian plume equations are important values that 
determine how quickly the plume disperses as it travels downwind. MACCS has two main methods 
to determine y and z. The user can choose either a power-law function or user-supplied lookup 
tables to model the dispersion parameters, both of which depend on distance and stability class. In 
addition, as an option for modeling long-range dispersion the user can switch the lateral dispersion 
z (m) y (m) Distance Downwind (km) Distance Downwind (km)58
rate from distance-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) to time-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑡) at a specified distance 
downwind.
In addition to the dispersion rate models, linear scaling factors for dispersion (YSCALE, ZSCALE) 
discussed in Section 2.5.5 and the plume meander models (PLMMOD) discussed in Section 2.5.6
can also affect dispersion. 
The rate at which materials disperse in the atmosphere depends strongly on atmospheric 
turbulence, which varies greatly with stability class. To update the dispersion rate model based on 
new atmospheric conditions, to account for the initial dispersion from a building wake, and to 
switch from distance- to time-based dispersion, MACCS uses a concept known as a “virtual source 
location” described in Section 2.5.4.
2.5.3.1 Power Law Option
The user can choose to use the power-law function by setting a value of zero to the number of 
distances defined in the lookup table option (NUM_DIST). The dispersion parameter power-law 
functions for y and z have the following forms:
𝜎𝑦𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑎𝑦𝑖 ∙ (
𝑥
𝑥0
)
𝑏𝑦𝑖
𝜎𝑧𝑖(𝑥) = 𝑎𝑧𝑖 ∙ (
𝑥
𝑥0
)
𝑏𝑧𝑖 (2-22)
Where
• 𝜎𝑦𝑖 is the lateral dispersion parameter for stability class, i, for stability classes A-F. This 
parameter is the standard deviation of a Gaussian distribution (m).
• 𝜎𝑧𝑖 is the vertical dispersion parameter for stability class, i. This parameter is the standard 
deviation of a Gaussian distribution (m).
• 𝑥 is the downwind distance (m) from the virtual source. 
• 𝑥0 is a fixed unit of length, 1 m, and ensures that the term 𝑥⁄𝑥0
is dimensionless.
• 𝑎𝑦𝑖 and 𝑎𝑧𝑖 are the linear coefficients (m) in the power-law expressions for lateral 
dispersion and vertical dispersion, respectively, for stability class, i. These values are 
specified by the input parameters CYSIGA and CZSIGA, respectively.
• 𝑏𝑦𝑖 and 𝑏𝑧𝑖 are the exponentials (dimensionless) in the power-law expressions for lateral 
dispersion and vertical dispersion, respectively, for stability class, i. These values are 
specified by the input parameters CZSIGB and CZSIGB, respectively.59
Tadmor & Gur (1969) constructed power-law fits to the Pasquill-Gifford (P-G) curves discussed 
in Section 2.5.2. NUREG-1150 and the original MACCS Sample Problem A (NRC, 1990, 
Appendix A) used these values, which are provided in Table 2-4. 
Table 2-4 Tadmor and Gur Dispersion Coefficients for Equation (2-22) for a distance range of 0.5 
to 5 km.
Stability Class 𝝈𝒚𝒊 𝝈𝒛𝒊
P-G i 𝒂𝒚𝒊 𝒃𝒚𝒊 𝒂𝒛𝒊 𝒃𝒛𝒊
A 1 0.3658 0.9031 0.00025 2.125
B 2 0.2751 0.9031 0.0019 1.6021
C 3 0.2089 0.9031 0.2 0.8543
D 4 0.1474 0.9031 0.3 0.6532
E 5 0.1046 0.9031 0.4 0.6021
F 6 0.0722 0.9031 0.2 0.6020
*The values of these constants reflect correction of typographical errors identified by Dobbins (1979).
More recently, NUREG/CR-7161 (Bixler, Clauss, & Morrow, 2013) constructed power-law fits to 
dispersion data from the NRC / CEC joint expert elicitation (Harper, et al., 1995). The SOARCA 
project (NUREG-1935; NRC, 2012) used these values, which are provided in Table 2-5:
Table 2-5 NUREG/CR-7161 Dispersion Coefficients for Equation (2-22), Median Values of 
Expert Elicitation (Bixler, Clauss, & Morrow, 2013)7
Stability Class 𝝈𝒚𝒊 𝝈𝒛𝒊
P-G i 𝒂𝒚𝒊 𝒃𝒚𝒊 𝒂𝒛𝒊 𝒃𝒛𝒊
A 1 0.7507 0.866 0.0361 1.277
B 2 0.7507 0.866 0.0361 1.277
C 3 0.4063 0.865 0.2036 0.859
D 4 0.2779 0.881 0.2636 0.751
E 5 0.2158 0.866 0.2463 0.619
F 6 0.2158 0.866 0.2463 0.619
7 Note that the same parameter values are assigned for classes A/B and for classes E/F. Use of the NUREG/CR-7161 
correlations would appear to result in effectively four stability classes: unstable (A/B), slightly unstable (C), neutral 
(D), and stable (E/F/G).60
2.5.3.2 Lookup Table Option
The lookup table option allows the user to define a lookup table as an alternative to power-law 
functions for y and z. If tracer experiments are available for a site, it may be possible to process 
the data into tables of lateral and vertical standard deviations (y and z) in this way.
To use the lookup table option, the user sets a value for the number of distances to be defined in 
the lookup table (NUM_DIST) between 3 and 50. The table requires user-defined distances and 
dispersion values. This includes lateral and vertical dispersion values (y and z) for each stability 
class (A to F), for a total of twelve dispersion values at each specified distance.
The lookup table option uses an interpolation technique known as a Hermite cubic spline as 
discussed by Kahaner, Moler, & Nash (1989). This approach avoids the numerical instabilities 
observed with other cubic spline fits. The lookup table option does not extrapolate beyond the user 
supplied distances, and instead simply uses the dispersion value of the closest distance that is 
specified in the table.
2.5.3.3 Time-Based Option
As an option for modeling long-range dispersion, the user can switch the lateral dispersion 
parameter from distance-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) (according to the power law equation or the 
lookup tables previously discussed), to time-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑡) at a certain distance 
downwind. The user can choose the time-based dispersion model by setting a value of “LRTIME”
to the parameter DISPMD. To only use the distance-based dispersion (either power law option or 
the lookup-table option), the user sets a value of “LRDIST” for the parameter DISPMD. When 
mapping dispersion onto the spatial grid, a time-based dispersion model updates dispersion when 
a change in windspeed occurs, whereas a distance-based dispersion updates dispersion when a 
change in stability class occurs.
Time-based dispersion requires the user to select the downwind distance at which the code 
switches from distance-based dispersion to time-based dispersion (CYDIST). The user must also 
select a linear coefficient, 𝑎𝑐
, for the time-based dispersion model (CYCOEF). The default value 
for the time-based linear coefficient and the transition distance are 0.5 m/s and 30 km, respectively, 
based on a recommendation by Hanna (2002). The virtual source concept (as discussed in Section
2.5.4) is used to ensure that there is no discontinuity in switching from distance- to time-based 
dispersion.
When the user implements power law option at close distances, the following equation describes 
the switch from distance-based dispersion to time-based dispersion: 
𝜎𝑦 = {
𝑎 (
𝑥
𝑥0
)
𝑏
𝑥 < 𝑥𝑐
𝑎𝑐
𝑡 𝑥 ≥ 𝑥𝑐
(2-23)
Where 
• 𝜎𝑦 is the lateral dispersion parameter (m) in the crosswind direction,61
• a is the linear coefficient (m) for distance-based lateral dispersion for a given stability 
class,
• b is the exponent (dimensionless) for distance-based lateral dispersion for a given 
stability class,
• 𝑎𝑐
is the linear coefficient for time-based lateral dispersion (m/s), specified by the input 
parameter CYCOEF,
• 𝑥0 is unity (m) used to make the term 𝑥/𝑥0 dimensionless, 
• 𝑥𝑐
is the distance from the source (m) at which the use of the lateral dispersion model 
switches from distance- to time-based, specified by the input parameter CYDIST,
• 𝑥 is the downwind distance from the virtual source (m), and
• t is the time since the plume was released from the virtual source (s).
Alternatively, the user can implement a lookup table for distances less than CYDIST.
When the time-based dispersion model is enabled, time-based dispersion is implemented at 
distances greater than or equal to 𝑥𝑐 as shown in Equation (2-23). However, distance-based 
dispersion is always applied within the first ring, regardless of the value of CYDIST. 
Hanna (2002) recommends that dispersion beyond 30 km be based on time rather than distance. 
The time-based dispersion option allows the user to implement Hanna’s recommendation, and the 
time-based dispersion model is closer to the treatment used in some Gaussian puff codes. The basis 
for the recommended distance, 30 km, is that the expert elicitation only considered distances as far 
as 30 km (Harper, et al., 1995) and that several Gaussian puff codes switch to time-based 
dispersion at about 30 or 40 km (Draxler & Hess, 1997). The distances required to model 
consequences for a nuclear reactor accident can extend considerably farther than 30 km, a 
minimum of 80 km. 
2.5.4 Virtual Source Calculation
The dispersion rate models use a concept known as a “virtual” source location. A virtual source 
location is a release point at a hypothetical upwind location. The location of this virtual source 
depends on the dispersion rate model and is based on the dispersion at a specific plume location.
With these boundary conditions, the dispersion rate models can calculate downwind lateral 
dispersion (y) and vertical dispersion (z) according to the downwind distance (x; or release time 
[t]) from the virtual source location. The downwind distance (x) and release time (t) from the 
virtual source location are used only to calculate downwind dispersion. Plume locations are always 
expressed relative to the release point, which is the center point of the polar-coordinate 
computational grid. The virtual source location is generally different for σy and σz.
MACCS uses these boundary conditions and the associated virtual source location for several 
different purposes. One purpose is to update dispersion based on changing atmospheric conditions.62
The distance-based dispersion parameters 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) and 𝜎𝑧
(𝑥) depend on stability class, and the 
stability class changes discretely as the plume travels downwind. As such, MACCS allows the rate 
of plume expansion to also change discretely according to the updated atmospheric conditions, in 
a piecewise continuous fashion.
In order to maintain the correct amount of plume dispersion when changing from one set of 
atmospheric conditions to the next, MACCS calculates a new virtual source location. See Figure 
2-4 for a representation of this piecewise continuous dispersion of the plume.
Figure 2-4 Growth of y During Three Time Periods Characterized by Different Atmospheric 
Stabilities i, j, and k
MACCS also uses the virtual source location concept to estimate dispersion after building wake 
effects from the initial release. The initial plume height (SIGZINIT) and plume width (SIGYINIT) 
caused by building wake are user inputs. These initial plume dimensions at a downwind distance 
of zero meters act as the boundary conditions for calculating the virtual source location.
Another example of where MACCS uses a virtual source term is to switch from a distance-based 
dispersion parameter 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) to time-based dispersion 𝜎𝑦
(𝑡). Like the changes in atmospheric 
conditions, the switch to time-based dispersion is a discrete change. The boundary condition for 
the virtual source location is the specific amount of plume dispersion (previously determined by 
one of the distance-based dispersion models) at a user specified downwind location (CYDIST).
From this boundary condition, the time-based dispersion model calculates downwind dispersion 
based on the time (t) relative to the time it was released from the virtual source. Lateral dispersion 
𝜎𝑦
(𝑡) does not depend on the stability class, and so after a switch to time-based dispersion, the 
virtual source time is constant. Note, however, that time-based dispersion is not constant with 63
distance when there are changes in windspeed. Therefore, the plume shape over the spatial grid 
can appear to have discrete changes like those shown in Figure 2-4, although for a different reason.
The following shows how MACCS uses the power law option for calculating the new source 
distances (i.e., the downwind distances from the virtual source) based on a change in stability class.
Let i be the stability class before the change in atmospheric conditions and 𝑥𝑦𝑖 and 𝑥𝑧𝑖 be the source 
distances under the original conditions (i.e., the downwind distances to the virtual source just 
before the stability class changes). Let j be the stability class after the change, and 𝑥𝑦𝑗 and 𝑥𝑧𝑗 be 
the virtual source distances under the updated conditions. To ensure continuity, 𝜎𝑦𝑖 must be equal 
to 𝜎𝑦𝑗 and 𝜎𝑧𝑖 must be equal to 𝜎𝑧𝑗 at the transition. Thus,
𝑎𝑖(𝑥𝑦𝑖
)
𝑏𝑖 = 𝜎𝑦𝑖 = 𝜎𝑦𝑗 = 𝑎𝑗 (𝑥𝑦𝑗
)
𝑏𝑗
𝑐𝑖(𝑥𝑧𝑖
)
𝑑𝑖 = 𝜎𝑧𝑖 = 𝜎𝑧𝑗 = 𝑐𝑗 (𝑥𝑧𝑗
)
𝑑𝑗
(2-24)
These equations can be solved explicitly for the new virtual source distance to produce the 
following result:
𝑥𝑦𝑗 = (
𝜎𝑦𝑖
𝑎𝑗
)
1
𝑏𝑗
= [
1
𝑎𝑗
𝑎𝑖(𝑥𝑦𝑖
)
𝑏𝑖
]
1
𝑏𝑗
𝑥𝑧𝑗 = (
𝜎𝑧𝑖
𝑐𝑗
)
1
𝑑𝑗
= [
1
𝑐𝑗
𝑐𝑖(𝑥𝑧𝑖
)
𝑑𝑖
]
1
𝑑𝑗
(2-25)
This same approach can be used in conjunction with the lookup table option described above. For 
this option, calculating the virtual source distances and the dispersion parameter values use the 
same lookup tables and interpolation methods. The ability to calculate the virtual source distance 
assumes that the inverse functional dependence for the lookup table can be evaluated, i.e., that 
given a dispersion value, a unique value of x can be determined. To ensure uniqueness, MACCS 
requires the tables to have monotonically increasing values.
2.5.5 Dispersion Scaling Factors
MACCS has scaling factors that act as multipliers on 𝜎𝑦 and 𝜎𝑧
. The user can change the lateral 
scaling factor (YSCALE) to linearly decrease or increase the amount of lateral plume dispersion 
(𝜎𝑦), and likewise can change vertical scaling factor (ZSCALE) to linearly decrease or increase 
the amount of vertical plume dispersion (𝜎𝑧
).
These scaling factors can help account for phenomena that would tend to increase or decrease the 
plume dimensions. Two such phenomena that are commonly included in plume modeling are
plume broadening caused by meander (wind direction fluctuations) and increased vertical 
spreading caused by the surface roughness of terrain. MACCS has separate models for plume 
meander, as described in Section 2.5.6. As such, the lateral scaling factor is usually set to 1.0.64
However, MACCS does not contain a separate model to account for surface roughness, so users 
commonly modify the vertical scale factor for each site.
The surface roughness of terrain causes increased turbulence and increased vertical dispersion.
The dispersion rate model data are from field experiments (e.g., Prairie Grass experiment) or other 
sources with an associated surface roughness. However, the terrain near nuclear power plants 
typically have a greater surface roughness length than those for field experiments and therefore 
have more vertical dispersion. Hanna, Briggs, & Hosker (1982, p. 29) estimates that the increase 
in vertical dispersion is proportional to the surface roughness with an exponential factor of “q,” 
where the exponent q is a constant that is typically a value of 0.2, but can range from 0.10 to 2.5.
As such, users usually account for the increased amount of vertical dispersion by calculating a 
value for ZSCALE based on the following relationship:
𝑍𝑆𝐶𝐴𝐿𝐸 = (
𝑧0
𝑧0,𝑟𝑒𝑓)
𝑞
= (
𝑧0
3 𝑐𝑚
)
0.2
(2-26)
Where
• ZSCALE is the linear scaling coefficient for vertical dispersion.
• 𝑧0,𝑟𝑒𝑓 is a reference surface roughness. This should be the surface roughness associated 
with the data underlying the dispersion rate model, which is 3 cm if the data are from the 
Prairie Grass experiments.
• 𝑧0 is the surface roughness (cm) of the terrain within a few kilometers of the release.
• 𝑞 is an exponential factor that relates surface roughness to vertical dispersion, typically 
a value of 0.2.
Figure 2-5 presents some approximate surface roughness lengths for different land uses based on 
the values in (Lettau, 1969; Briggs, 1984; Randerson, 1984).65
Figure 2-5 Approximate Surface Roughness Lengths (z0) for Various Surfaces
Because surface roughness affects both vertical dispersion and dry deposition velocities, users 
should choose values for ZSCALE and VDEPOS that are consistent. Dry deposition velocity is 
discussed in more detail in Section 2.7.2
2.5.6 Plume Meander 
Wind shifts that can occur at time intervals less than that of the recorded weather data (i.e., less 
than the weather averaging time) can result in an apparent dispersion that is greater than would be 
computed using dispersion curves based on measurements over a shorter time period, such as the 
Pasquill-Gifford curves. The apparent increase in lateral dispersion can be significant under stable, 
low-wind speed conditions. This effect is known as plume meander.
MACCS has two explicit models for plume meander, which are the original MACCS model and a 
model based on NUREG/CR-2260 (Snell & Jubach, 1981) and Reg Guide 1.145 (NRC, 1983). A 
user can choose not to use a plume meander model by giving a value of “OFF” to the parameter 
MNDMOD. Even with no explicit model for plume meander, the user can still account for 
increased lateral dispersion using a constant, linear scaling factor (YSCALE), as discussed in 
Section 2.5.5.
The MACCS plume meander models calculate a meander factor. Like the lateral dispersion scaling 
factor, YSCALE, the meander factor acts as a multiplier on lateral dispersion (y) and works with 
either distance-based or time-based dispersion rate models.
𝜎𝑦𝑚 = 𝑓𝑚 ⋅ 𝜎𝑦 (2-27)
Where
• 𝜎𝑦𝑚 is lateral dispersion (m) accounting for plume meander,
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.1
Grassland
Suburban
Residential Dwellings
Plowed Field
Wheat Field
Natural Snow
1000
800
600
400
200
100
80
60
40
20
10
Urban Area
Woodland Forest
High Rise Buildings
(30+ Floors)
Suburban 
Medium Buildings
(Institutional)
Z0
(cm)
Roughness Height, z0 (cm)
8.0
6.0
4.0
2.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.1
Grassland
Suburban
Residential Dwellings
Plowed Field
Wheat Field
Natural Snow
1000
800
600
400
200
100
80
60
40
20
10
Urban Area
Woodland Forest
High Rise Buildings
(30+ Floors)
Suburban 
Medium Buildings
(Institutional)
Z0
(cm)
1000
800
600
400
200
100
80
60
40
20
10
Urban Area
Woodland Forest
High Rise Buildings
(30+ Floors)
Suburban 
Medium Buildings
(Institutional)
Z0
(cm)
Roughness Height, z0 (cm)66
• 𝜎𝑦 is lateral dispersion (m) not accounting for plume meander,
• 𝑓𝑚 is the meander factor (dimensionless), as calculated by one of the MACCS plume 
meander models described below.
Lateral dispersion, 𝜎𝑦, is based on one of the dispersion rate model previously described, either 
distance-based 𝜎𝑦
(𝑥) defined in terms of a power-law equation or as a lookup table, or it can be 
time-based 𝜎𝑦
(𝑡). Depending on the meander model, the meander factor 𝑓𝑚 can depend either on 
release duration or on downwind distance, windspeed, and stability class.
2.5.6.1 Original Plume Meander Model
A user can choose to use the original MACCS plume meander model by setting a value of “OLD” 
to the parameter MNDMOD. The original MACCS model was designed based on the PasquillGifford
dispersion data and accounts for the effect of meander during transport of a plume segment 
using a meander factor, as defined in Equation (2-27). The meander factor in the original meander 
model is defined as follows:
𝑓𝑚 = {
1 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 ≤ 𝛥𝑡0
(𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒⁄𝛥𝑡0)
𝐹1 𝑖𝑓 𝛥𝑡0 < 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 ≤ 𝛥𝑡1
(𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒⁄𝛥𝑡0)
𝐹2 𝛥𝑡1 < 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 ≤ 10
(2-28)
Where
• 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑙𝑒𝑎𝑠𝑒 is the release duration for the plume segment (s), specified in the parameter 
PLUDUR,
• 𝛥𝑡0 is the release duration (s), defined by the parameter TIMBAS. This is usually chosen 
to be 600 s, which is the release duration of the Prairie Grass experiment,
8
• 𝛥𝑡1 is the breakpoint in release duration (s), defined by the parameter BRKPNT,
• 𝐹1 is the exponent for time dependence below the breakpoint (dimensionless), defined 
by the parameter XPFAC1, and 
• 𝐹2 is the exponent for time dependence above the breakpoint (dimensionless), defined 
by the parameter XPFAC2.
All the values used to define the meander factor are input parameters. Gifford (1975) recommends 
a value of 0.2 for 𝐹1 and a value of 0.25 for 𝐹2 when the breakpoint is 3,600 seconds. Users should 
limit plume segment release durations to 10 hr, because Equation (2-28) is not intended to be used 
8 There is some controversy over the correct reference time, 𝛥𝑡0
, to use in the denominator of Equation (2-26). The 
averaging time for the Prairie Grass tests was 600 s and some authors support using this value; other authors support 
using a value of 180 s. Since the reference time in Equation (2-26) is a user input (TIMBAS), either value can be 
chosen by the user.67
for longer release durations. If a plume segment exceeds 10 hr a nonfatal warning is given in the 
output file and the meander factor is calculated as though the plume duration were 10 hr. 
2.5.6.2 New Plume Meander Model (Based on Regulatory Guide 1.145)
MACCS contains a plume meander model based on the meander factors developed in 
NUREG/CR-2260 (Snell & Jubach, 1981), which in turn is based on the Rancho Seco field tracer 
experiments (Start, et al., 1977). NUREG/CR-2260 supports Regulatory Guide 1.145 (NRC, 
1982). A user can choose to use this meander model by setting a value of “NEW” to the parameter 
MNDMOD.
The NUREG/CR-2260 meander factors correct the Pasquill-Gifford lateral dispersion values to 
account for plume meander. Unlike the original model, this model accounts for the observation 
that plume meander depends on stability class and windspeed. NUREG/CR-2260 states that plume 
meander is most prevalent for stability classes D through G for low wind speeds. As such, the 
authors assigned a range of windspeeds for which plume meander is applicable, that being fully 
applicable below 2 m/s, not applicable above 6 m/s, and between these two values a meander factor 
that varies logarithmically with windspeed. Furthermore, because the tracer field experiments used 
sensors out to 800 m, NUREG/CR-2260 deemed it inappropriate to model additional meander 
beyond this point. MACCS generalizes the approach and defines the meander factor as follows:
𝑓𝑚 = {
𝑚𝑖
⋅ 𝑓(𝑢) 𝑥 ≤ 𝑑
1 𝑥 > 𝑑
(2-29)
And
𝑓(𝑢) =
{
 
 
1 𝑢 ≤ 𝑢1
1
𝑚𝑖
∙ 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [(1 −
𝑙𝑛( 𝑢) − 𝑙𝑛( 𝑢1)
𝑙𝑛( 𝑢2) − 𝑙𝑛( 𝑢1)
) ∙ 𝑙𝑛( 𝑚𝑖)] 𝑢1 < 𝑢 ≤ 𝑢2
1/𝑚𝑖 𝑢2 < 𝑢
(2-30)
Where
• 𝑚𝑖
is the maximum meander factor (dimensionless) for stability class, i. These values 
are specified by the input parameter MNDFACi, and where integers of i = 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 
and 6 correspond to stability classes A, B, C, D, E, and F/G, respectively.
• 𝑥 is the downwind distance from the virtual source (m).
• 𝑑 is a distance within which plume meander affects lateral plume dispersion, as defined 
by the parameter MNDIST.
• 𝑓(𝑢) is a dimensionless function that ranges between (1/𝑚𝑖
, 1) and specifies how 
quickly the meander factor diminishes as windspeed increases.
• 𝑢 is windspeed (m/s), according to the weather data.68
• 𝑢1 is the windspeed (m/s) where the meander factor changes from a constant value to a 
decreasing function of the windspeed, as defined by the parameter WINSP1.
• 𝑢2 is the windspeed (m/s) where the meander factor reaches one for all stability classes, 
as defined by parameter WINSP2.
As indicated in Equation (2-29), this meander model treats meander for distances less than 𝑑, but 
does not treat additional meander beyond 𝑑. To ensure continuity in dispersion at 𝑑, MACCS uses 
the virtual source location method described in Section 2.5.4. The MACCS plume meander model 
closely matches the Regulatory Guide 1.145 model when the meander factor 𝑚𝑖 = [1, 1, 1, 2, 3, 4]
for stability class i, 𝑢1 = 2 m/s, 𝑢2 = 6 m/s, and 𝑑 = 800 m. These are the recommended meander 
factors for MNDFACi.
Analysts should be aware that these meander factors were derived based as corrections for 
Pasquill-Gifford lateral dispersion values, which were based on vertical temperature lapse rates to 
characterize atmospheric releases and based on 1-hour releases. Analysts should use caution when 
using this model with other dispersion curves or other stability classification methods. In addition, 
while the original plume meander model in MACCS accounts for the duration of the release, the 
Regulatory Guide 1.145 model is calibrated for 1-hour release durations. This plume meander 
model overpredicts peak doses for release durations significantly longer than 1 hour and 
underpredicts peak doses for release durations significantly shorter than 1 hour. Enforcement of 
this model restriction is left to the user; MACCS does not restrict the duration of plume segments 
to be approximately 1 hour when this model is selected. 
2.6 Downwind Transport
The length of a plume segment depends on its release duration (PLUDUR) and the windspeed 
during release. For plume segments that span multiple hours of weather data, MACCS matches 
the plume segment release period with the weather data. As such, a plume segment length Ls is 
defined by the following:
𝐿𝑠 = ∑𝑢𝑖
∙ Δ𝑡𝑟,𝑖
𝑁
𝑖=𝑛
(2-31)
where
• 𝐿𝑠
is the length (m) plume segment, 
• 𝑢𝑖
(m/s) is the windspeed during time period i, as given by the weather data,
• Δ𝑡𝑟,𝑖
(s) is the duration of release during weather hour i, where the summation of all 
durations is equal to the full release duration of the plume segment, PLUDUR.
• {n, ..., N} is the set of weather hours during which release occurs, where the delay to 
plume segment release (PDELAY) is in hour n, and where plume segment release ends 
(PDELAY + PLUDUR) in hour N. 69
The values of Δ𝑡𝑟,𝑛+1 through Δ𝑡𝑟,𝑁−1 are all equal to one hour and Δ𝑡𝑟,𝑛 and Δ𝑡𝑟,𝑁 may be parts 
of an hour, assuming that weather data are hourly. The MACCS downwind plume segment 
transport does not consider how the height of the plume affects the windspeed (i.e., no vertical 
wind shear). Likewise, the Gaussian equations in MACCS assume that turbulent velocities are 
small compared with the mean windspeed (Kao, 1984). Therefore, the plume segment moves 
downwind as one unit with a distinct cutoff at the leading and trailing edge.
After the plume segment is fully released, it continuesto change speeds according to the windspeed 
values specified in the weather data. Changes in windspeed simultaneously affect the entire plume 
segment. Therefore, the length of the plume segment is constant during downwind transport
(except when a transition from weather sequence data to boundary weather occurs, for which 
MACCS preserves the residence time of the plume segment overhead rather than the length). As 
such, MACCS determines the transit time of any location along the plume segment (e.g., head, 
midpoint, tail) to any downwind grid point (e.g., inner boundary, midpoint, or outer boundary of 
a radial interval) with the following equation:
𝑡𝑑 = ∑ Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑖
𝑀
𝑖=𝑚
(2-32)
Where 
• 𝑡𝑑 is transit time (s) of any point of interest along a plume segment to a downwind 
location, relative to the release time (PDELAY) of the plume segment’s reference 
location (specified by REFTIM), 
• Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑖
is the duration (s) of plume segment transit during weather hour i, and
• {m, ..., M} is the set of weather hours during plume segment transit.
As before, the values of Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑚+1 through Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑀−1 are all equal to one hour and Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑚 and Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑀
may be part of an hour. The first duration Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑚 is the remaining time in weather hour m at the 
time specified by PDELAY. The last duration Δ𝑡𝑑,𝑀 is based on the windspeed u during weather 
hour M and the remaining distance of the point of interest on the plume segment to the downwind 
location, (𝑑𝑀−𝑑𝑀−1
)
𝑢𝑀
, where 𝑑𝑀 is the distance to the downwind location from the point of release.
Finally, the plume segment overhead time, ∆𝑡𝑒
, which is the duration of a plume segment 
traversing any downwind location is given by the following equation:
∆𝑡𝑒 = 𝑡𝑡 − 𝑡ℎ (2-33)
Where 𝑡ℎ and 𝑡𝑡 are the arrival times (s) of the head and the tail of the plume segment, respectively.
The plume segment overhead time is an input to dose equations for cloudshine and direct 
inhalation, discussed in more detail in Section 3.70
2.7 Plume Depletion
Radioactivity is removed from plume segments by decay and by deposition of radioactive 
materials onto the ground. While radioactivity reduces plume concentrations, the decay and 
ingrowth of radionuclides is not considered in the computational framework until after 
atmospheric transport modeling is complete. Once undecayed air and ground concentrations are 
known, MACCS adjusts the air and ground concentrations to account for radioactive decay and 
ingrowth.
Deposition onto the ground is caused by wet and dry deposition onto surfaces. The deposition 
caused by precipitation is called wet deposition. Deposition not caused by rain is called dry 
deposition. In MACCS, these processes are modeled as first-order rate processes.
2.7.1 Radioactive Decay and Ingrowth
After atmospheric transport modeling is complete, MACCS adjusts the air and ground 
concentrations to account for radioactive decay and ingrowth. MACCS accounts for radioactive 
decay and ingrowth using data in the decay chain definition file INDEXR.DAT. The dataset 
contains the half-lives, decay products, and decay fractions for 825 radionuclides. The dataset is 
supplied by the Radiation Shielding Information Center as part of the FGR-DOSE/DLC-167 data 
package. 
MACCS allows decay chains to have up to five decays, which is a total of six generations of 
nuclides including the parent. Decay chains can be terminated in two ways. If the decay chain 
reaches a stable isotope, the chain is automatically terminated. The other option is to terminate the 
decay chain early. To avoid the unnecessary computational expense, this is commonly done when 
the decay product is very long-lived and contributes very little to the overall dose. The user can 
terminate a decay chain by adding the long-lived daughter product to the list of “pseudostable” 
isotopes (NAMSTB). 
For example, Cs-135 is formed by beta decay of Xe-135. It decays to Ba-135 by low-energy beta 
decay with a half-life of 2.3 × 106
years. Because of the long half-life and low energy beta produced 
by its decay, Ba-135 has little effect on doses and is often included as a decay-chain terminator in 
MACCS calculations by including it as a pseudostable isotope.
In some older calculations, decay products were treated implicitly by adding the dose coefficients 
for the progeny to the one for the parent radionuclide and including the progeny in the list of 
pseudostable radionuclides. This simplification was done to reduce memory and CPU 
requirements. It works when the half-life for the progeny is much shorter than the one for the 
parent so that the progeny decays almost immediately once the parent radionuclide decays. This 
practice somewhat disguises the set of radionuclides that are being treated in a problem and reduces 
flexibility. Since computer memory is at much less of a premium now than when MACCS was 
initially developed, this practice of implicitly including progeny in a calculation is not used with 
the latest dose conversion factor files.71
MACCS evaluates the radioactive decay of each radionuclide in the initial inventory and buildup 
of radioactive daughters using standard formulae (Adamson, 1973, p. 1046). For simple first-order 
decay with no ingrowth, MACCS uses the following equation:
𝐷(𝑡)
𝐷0
=
𝜆𝑁(𝑡)
𝜆𝑁0
= 𝑒
−𝜆𝑡
(2-34)
Where
• 𝐷(𝑡) is the radioactivity (Bq) at time t, 
• 𝐷0 is the radioactivity (Bq) at time zero, 
• 𝑁(𝑡) is the number of radioactive atoms at time t, 
• 𝑁0 is the number of radioactive atoms at time zero, and
• 𝜆 is the decay constant (1/s), as provided by the data in the decay chain definition file 
(INDEXR.DAT).
Decay of a parent radionuclide to a radioactive daughter is calculated using the following equation:
𝐷2
(𝑡) =
𝜆2
𝜆2 − 𝜆1
𝐷1,0(𝑒
−𝜆1𝑡 − 𝑒
−𝜆2𝑡
) + 𝐷2,0𝑒
−𝜆2𝑡
(2-35)
Where
• 𝐷2
(𝑡) is the activity (Bq) of the daughter at time t,
• 𝐷1,0 and 𝐷2,0 are the activities (Bq) of the parent and daughter at time zero, and
• 𝜆1 and 𝜆2 are the decay constants (1/s) of the parent and daughter (𝜆1 ≠𝜆2), as provided 
by the data in the decay chain definition file (INDEXR.DAT).
In Equation (2-35), the second term represents decay of daughter atoms initially present at time 
zero.
Because the ingrowth of daughter products occurs between accident initiation and plume segment 
release, there are two options (“PARENT” and “PROGENY”) for how to treat radioactive decay 
using the parameter APLFRC. The “PARENT” option calculates radioactive decay and ingrowth 
in one step, starting from accident initiation. In this option, MACCS does not consider the ingrowth 
of daughter products until after transport. The “PROGENY” option calculates radioactive decay 
and ingrowth in two steps. First, MACCS calculates the decay and ingrowth that occurs between 
accident initiation and plume segment release, which MACCS uses to update the radionuclide 
inventory. MACCS then calculates decay and ingrowth as it would have in the “PARENT” option, 
only in this option radioactive decay and ingrowth start from the intermediate step of plume 
release.
The two options can produce different results because the daughter products created between 
accident initiation and plume segment release can have different chemical properties than the 
parents. For instance, the daughter product may be more volatile and have a larger release fraction, 72
or it may form different aerosol sizes that impact its deposition rate during transport. In the 
“PARENT” option, the new decay products have the same release fraction and aerosol size 
distribution as the parent radionuclide, while in the “PROGENY” option, daughter products are 
treated no differently from the same radionuclides present at accident initiation. 
Neither option is perfect, but the better option depends on the fraction of decay that occurs before 
versus after release from the fuel and whether the decay involves a phase change between parent 
and progeny. For example, if a radionuclide is formed by decay before being released from the 
fuel, it is most likely released in proportion to its own chemical group, so “PROGENY” is the 
better option. If the decay occurs in an aerosol particle after release from fuel, then the decay 
product is likely to remain bound in the aerosol and to be released in proportion to the “PARENT” 
chemical group. If a decay product is volatile, as is the case when a noble gas is formed, then the 
decay product might be released in proportion to its own chemical group or might remain trapped 
for a period of time in an aerosol and thereby behave like the parent.
MACCS calculates a set of air and ground concentrations independent of decay and ingrowth. For 
the early phase, ATMOS calculates a separate set of air and ground concentrations for each plume 
segment. For the intermediate and long-term phases, the sum of the ground concentrations from 
all plume segments is sufficient. 
ATMOS adjusts the concentrations to consider decay and ingrowth starting from the beginning of 
the accident. For early doses, ATMOS considers decay and ingrowth up to the point in time when 
a plume segment exits a radial interval, i.e., at the point in time when deposition is complete for 
the radial interval being reported. This is done for each plume segment, as the timing of the plume 
segments affect the amount of decay and ingrowth. For exposures that continue after plume 
departure, the early dose pathways in EARLY continue to account for decay and ingrowth in the 
dose calculations. For late doses, ATMOS considers decay and ingrowth of the total ground 
concentration up to the end of the early phase. For exposures that continue after the early phase, 
the late dose pathways in CHRONC also continue to account for decay and ingrowth. 
2.7.2 Dry Deposition
Dry deposition is modeled using Chamberlain's source depletion method (Chamberlain, 1953; 
Hosker, 1974; Karlsson, 1982) modified to allow treatment of a particle size distribution and of 
capping of vertical expansion by an inversion layer. The source depletion method calculates the 
rate at which materials are deposited onto the ground (the deposition flux) as the product of the 
ground-level air concentration of the materials and the dry deposition velocity (Sehmel, 1984) of 
those materials. The method neglects the effects of deposition on the vertical distribution of the
plume. Thus, dry deposition does not perturb the normal distribution of plume materials in the 
vertical direction. This is generally an excellent assumption because turbulent advection is 
generally on the order of 0.5 m/s while deposition velocities are typically a few cm/s or less. When 
stable conditions occur, the assumption introduces an artificial flux of material from upper regions 
of the plume to regions near the ground.
The ground-level air concentration at a location (x, y, z = 0) of a plume that is capped by an 
inversion layer at height H is obtained from Equation (2-19) and setting z = 0, which yields the 
following:73
𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 0) =
𝑄
𝑢
∙ 𝑓𝐺
(𝑦) ∙ 𝜓0
(2-36)
Where 𝜓(𝑧) is the plume distribution in the vertical direction (m
-1
), as defined in Equations (2-20)
and (2-21), and 𝜓0 is the value of the distribution at 𝜓(𝑧 = 0). The flux of plume material to the 
ground, 𝜔(𝑥, 𝑦) is given by the following:
𝜔(𝑥, 𝑦) = 𝑣𝑑 ∙ 𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 0) (2-37)
where 𝑣𝑑, the dry deposition velocity (VDEPOS), embodies the combined effects of gravitational 
settling, impaction, and diffusion of suspended materials onto the ground and other surfaces 
(Sehmel, 1984).
The rate of plume material loss (𝑑𝑄/𝑑𝑥) by dry deposition onto the ground into a differential 
length dx located at the downwind distance x is the following (Hosker, 1974):
𝑑𝑄
𝑑𝑥 = − ∫ 𝜔(𝑥, 𝑦)𝑑𝑦
∞
−∞
(2-38)
Substitution of Equations (2-36) and (2-37) into Equation (2-38) gives,
𝑑𝑄
𝑑𝑥 = −
𝑣𝑑𝜓0𝑄
𝑢
∫ 𝑓𝐺
(𝑦)
∞
−∞
𝑑𝑦 = −
𝑣𝑑𝜓0𝑄
𝑢
(2-39)
where 
• 𝑣𝑑 is the dry deposition velocity (m/s), as specified by VDEPOS,
• 𝜓0 is shorthand for 𝜓(𝑧 = 0), which is the ground-level value of the plume distribution 
in the vertical direction (m
-1
), which is defined in Equation (2-20) and (2-21),
• 𝑄 is the released activity (Bq), 
• u is the windspeed (m/s), as given by the weather data, and 
• 𝑓𝐺
(𝑦) is the Gaussian distribution (m
-1
) representing lateral dispersion.
The integral of the lateral Gaussian distribution simplifies to one. During any single hour of 
weather data, the mean windspeed u is constant. Thus dx = udt, which when substituted into 
Equation (2-39) gives,
𝑑𝑄
𝑑𝑡 = −𝑣𝑑 ∙ 𝜓0 ∙ 𝑄 (2-40)
Rearranging and integrating and assuming 𝜓0 is a constant within a given radial interval gives,74
𝑄1
𝑄0
= 𝑓𝑑 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝[−𝑣𝑑 ∙ 𝜓0 ∙ ∆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓]
(2-41)
where 
• 𝑄0 is the amount of aerosols transported into the radial interval, 
• 𝑄1 is the amount transported out of the radial interval, 
• 𝑓𝑑 = 𝑄1/𝑄0 is the fraction not removed by dry deposition when the plume segment 
transverses the radial interval, 
• ∆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓 is the time required for the reference location (REFTIM) of a plume segment to 
transverse the radial interval, and 
• 𝑣𝑑 and 𝜓0 are the same as previously defined.
In MACCS, the effect of particle size on dry deposition velocity is treated by discretizing the 
particle size distribution of the materials subject to dry deposition (the radioactive aerosols) into 
i particle size bins (NPSGRP), specifying the fraction (𝑝𝑖
) of all aerosol materials in each particle 
size bin (PSDIST), assigning a dry deposition velocity (𝑣𝑑𝑖) to each size bin (VDEPOSi), and 
applying Equation (2-41) separately to each bin. Thus, the fraction 𝑓𝑑𝑖 of particle size bin i not 
removed by dry deposition when the plume segment transverses the radial interval is the following:
𝑄1𝑖
𝑄0𝑖
= 𝑓𝑑𝑖 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝[−𝑣𝑑𝑖 ∙ 𝜓0 ∙ ∆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓]
(2-42)
To calculate Equation (2-42), MACCS must first calculate the ground-level value of the vertical 
plume profile, 𝜓0, and the time ∆𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓 for the plume segment reference location to transverse the 
radial interval. 
Before the plume is fully vertically dispersed, 𝜓0 depends on the vertical dispersion parameter,
𝜎𝑧
(𝑥), which in turn depends on the downwind distance [see Equation (2-20)]. For radial interval 
j, MACCS calculates the vertical dispersion parameter using 𝜎̅𝑧,𝑗
shown in Equation (2-54), which 
is an average of the dispersion parameter values at the inner and outer edge of the radial interval.
After the plume is fully vertically dispersed, 𝜓0 is equal to 1/𝐻, where 𝐻 is the mixing layer height 
[see Equation (2-21)]. 
The term, 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓, is the time of arrival of the segment's reference location at the outer edge of the 
radial interval minus the time of its arrival at the inner edge of the interval. Because MACCS 
allows plume segments to have long release durations and radial intervals can have narrow radial 
dimensions, lengthy plume segments that span more than one radial interval are common. Of 
course, when exiting a radial interval, even a short plume segment lies over at least two radial 
intervals. Even when a plume segment lies above more than one radial interval, dry deposition 
from the segment is assumed to occur entirely onto the radial interval that contains the reference 
location regardless of how many radial intervals lie under the entire length of the segment.75
After a segment has traversed a radial interval, the amounts of material in each particle size bin
are decreased by the amounts removed from the bin by dry deposition during transport across the 
radial interval. Then, the fractions that specify the amounts of aerosol materials in the bins of the 
aerosol size distribution are recalculated and as a consistency check their sum is renormalized to 
be one.
Finally, since 𝑄1 = ∑𝑖 𝑄1𝑖
, 𝑄1𝑖 = 𝑄0𝑖
∙ 𝑓𝑑𝑖, and 𝑄0𝑖 = 𝑄0 ∙ 𝑝𝑖
, the fraction (𝑓𝑑) of all aerosol 
materials in all of the size bins i that remains after dry deposition has occurred from each bin onto 
the entire radial interval is given by:
𝑓𝑑 =
𝑄1
𝑄0
=
1
𝑄0
∑𝑄1𝑖
𝑖
=
1
𝑄0
∑𝑄0𝑖
𝑖
∙ 𝑓𝑑𝑖 =
1
𝑄0
∑𝑄0 ∙ 𝑝𝑖
∙ 𝑓𝑑𝑖
𝑖
= ∑𝑝𝑖
𝑖
∙ 𝑓𝑑𝑖 (2-43)
Section 2.8 provides more details on how dry deposition affects air and ground concentrations.
2.7.3 Wet Deposition
The wet deposition model estimates how much material is deposited during episodes of 
precipitation. Wet deposition is treated as a function of both precipitation duration and intensity.
Wet deposition is calculated using the model of Brenk & Vogt (1981):
𝑑𝑄
𝑑𝑡 = −𝛬𝑄 = −𝐶1 (
𝐼
𝐼0
)
𝐶2
∙ 𝑄 (2-44)
Where
• 𝑄 is the amount of suspended radioactive material (Bq),
• 𝛬 is the removal rate of aerosols by wet deposition (1/s),
• 𝐶1 is the linear wet deposition coefficient (1/s), as given by the parameter CWASH1,
• 𝐶2 is the exponential wet deposition coefficient (dimensionless), as given by the 
parameter CWASH2,
• 𝐼 is the intensity of precipitation (mm/hr), as specified by the weather data, and 
• 𝐼0 is the unit rain intensity, 1 mm/hr.
Integrating Equation (2-44), assuming a constant precipitation rate, provides the following
equation:
𝑄1
𝑄0
= 𝑓𝑤 = 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−𝐶1 (
𝐼
𝐼0
)
𝐶2
𝛥𝑡𝑤] (2-45)
Where
• 𝑓𝑤 = 𝑄1/𝑄0 is the fraction of suspended aerosols in a plume segment that is not removed 
by wet deposition while crossing a radial interval,76
• 𝑄0 is the amount of radioactive material (Bq) transported into the radial interval,
• 𝑄1 is the amount of radioactive material (Bq) transported out of the radial interval,
• 𝛥𝑡𝑤 is the duration (s) that the full plume segment takes to cross both ends of a given 
radial interval, and 
• 𝐶1, 𝐶2, 𝐼, and 𝐼0 are the same as previously defined.
Whereas the dry deposition model depends on particle size, the wet deposition model does not.
Also, unlike dry deposition, which is a continuous and relatively slow process, wet deposition is 
discontinuous and often is quite rapid relative to dry deposition. Therefore, treating wet deposition
entirely onto the radial interval that lies under the segment’s reference location is not acceptable. 
Instead, wet deposition is apportioned over all the radial intervals that lie under the segment.
For example, consider the release of a plume segment during a 10-hour period during which the 
average windspeed is 5 m/s. At the end of the release, the plume segment has a length of 180 km,
and especially during the early stages of a MACCS calculation, extends over many radial intervals. 
Suppose the windspeed drops to 1 m/s and that a one-hour rainstorm begins just as the segment's 
reference location enters a 3.6 km wide radial interval. In this example, most of the content of a 
180 km plume segment deposits onto a 3.6 km radial interval. This is clearly unrealistic. 
To apportion wet deposition over all the radial intervals traversed wholly or partially by a plume 
segment during a rainstorm, on an hourly basis, the average fraction of plume segment length 𝑓𝑎𝑣
that lies over a radial interval during the storm must be calculated. Let Lsj be the length of the 
portion of the plume segment that lies over the radial interval j beneath the plume at time t. Figure 
2-6 is a plot of Lsj vs t for a segment of total length LS and an interval of radial length Lj (length in 
the downwind direction), where Ls ≠ Lj. Because Ls ≠ Lj, the plot has a trapezoidal shape with 
height Lmax = Min (Ls, Lj). Note that when Ls = Lj the trapezoid is reduced to a triangle.
In Figure 2-6, t1 is the time when the head of the plume segment enters the radial interval; t6 is the 
time when the tail of the segment leaves the radial interval. If Ls < Lj, t2 is the time when the tail 
of the segment enters the radial interval and t4 the time when the head leaves the radial interval; if 
Ls > Lj, t2 is the time when the head of the segment leaves the radial interval and t4 is the time when 
the tail enters the radial interval. The time points, t3 and t5, are indicated by vertical dashed lines, 
denote the beginning and end of a one-hour time period (t5 - t3 = 1 hr) during which weather data 
is constant. Since windspeed has only one value during any hour of weather data, the area of the 
geometric shape bounded by the dashed lines is simple to calculate, no matter where the hourly 
time points fall. Let the area of this regular shape be A. Ls and Lj and thus Lmax are known, and all 
the time points on the figure (points t1 through t6) are known or are calculated by MACCS. Thus, 
for any one-hour time period, Lav, the average value of Lsj during that time period, is given by Lav
= A/(t5 - t3). Since t5 - t3 = 1 hr, Lav = A. The hourly average fraction of plume segment length 𝑓𝑎𝑣
that lies over a radial interval during the storm is given by 𝑓𝑎𝑣 = Lav/Ls. So, 𝑓𝑎𝑣 can be calculated 
hour-by-hour for each plume segment and every radial interval.77
Figure 2-6 Plume Segment Length Over a Radial Interval vs Time
The quantity 𝑓𝑎𝑣 now must be introduced into Equation (2-45). To see how this is done, let 𝛥𝑡𝑤 be 
the time required for the full plume segment to traverse both the inner and outer edge of a given 
radial interval.
Note that the plume segment transport time over a given radial interval for dry deposition, 𝛥𝑡𝑟𝑒𝑓,
the plume segment transport time over a given radial interval for wet deposition, 𝛥𝑡𝑤, and the 
plume segment transport time overhead a stationary individual, 𝛥𝑡𝑒
, are all different.
If the transport time 𝛥𝑡𝑤 is several hours long, then 𝛥𝑡𝑤 = ∑ 𝛥𝑡 𝑖 𝑖 where the first and last values 
of ∆ti can be fractional hours. Let 𝑓𝑎𝑣,𝑖 be the average fraction of the plume segment within the 
radial interval during 𝛥𝑡𝑖
, and let 𝑓𝑤 be the fraction of aerosol removed by wet deposition within 
the radial interval. The fraction of aerosol 𝑓𝑤𝑖 removed during 𝛥𝑡𝑖
is then the following.
𝑓𝑤𝑖 = 𝑓𝑎𝑣,𝑖
⋅ 𝑓𝑤 (2-46)
Where 𝑓𝑤𝑖 and 𝑓𝑤 are the complements of the fraction of material not removed from the plume 
(i.e., 𝑓𝑤𝑖 = 1 − 𝑓𝑤𝑖 and 𝑓𝑤 = 1 − 𝑓𝑤). Recall that 𝑓𝑤 was previously derived in Equation (2-45). 
By substituting Equation (2-44) for time step i into the formula above and solving for 𝑓𝑤𝑖 gives 
the following:
𝑓𝑤𝑖 = 1 − 𝑓𝑎𝑣,𝑖
⋅ (1 − 𝑒𝑥𝑝 [−𝐶1 (
𝐼𝑖
𝐼0
)
𝐶2
𝛥𝑡𝑖
]) (2-47)
And fw, the fraction of aerosol remaining in the plume after deposition only onto the radial interval
during all of the time steps i required to transport the plume segment across the radial interval, is 
given by the product of these fractions:
𝑓𝑤 = ∏𝑓𝑤𝑖
𝑖
(2-48)78
2.8 Centerline Air and Ground Concentrations
As modeled in MACCS, dry and wet deposition are independent processes. For example, assume 
that during transport across a radial interval dry deposition alone would deplete a plume segment 
of one-tenth of the material in the segment, and wet deposition alone would remove one-half of 
the material in the segment. Then, if the two processes are independent and occur simultaneously, 
the fraction of the material in the segment upon entry into the radial interval, that remains when 
the segment leaves the radial interval, is 0.45 = (1.0 - 0.1)(1.0 - 0.5). Thus, the total amount of 
material 𝛥𝑄𝑗 deposited onto the ground during transport of a plume segment across radial interval
j is given by,
𝛥𝑄𝑗 = 𝑄𝑗(1 − 𝑓𝑑𝑗 ∙ 𝑓𝑤𝑗) (2-49)
Where 
• 𝑄𝑗
is the amount of radioactive material (Bq) that is transported into interval j by the 
plume segment, discussed in more detail below,
• 𝑓𝑑𝑗 is the fraction of material (dimensionless) that would remain in the plume after 
transport across radial interval j if only dry deposition occurred, given by 
Equation (2-43), and 
• 𝑓𝑤𝑗 is the fraction of material (dimensionless) that would remain in the plume after 
transport across radial interval j if only wet deposition occurred, given by 
Equation (2-48).
Under this construct, it then follows that the amount of radioactive material 𝑄𝑗
transported into 
radial interval j is the following:
𝑄𝑗 = 𝑄0 ∙∏𝑓𝑑𝑛 ∙ 𝑓𝑤𝑛
𝑗−1
𝑛=1
(2-50)
Where 
• 𝑄0 is the released activity (Bq), which is the product of RELFRC and CORINV, modified 
by CORSCA, and 
• 𝑓𝑑𝑛 and 𝑓𝑤𝑛 are the same as before, except n belongs to the set of radial intervals that the 
plume segment transverses before reaching radial interval j.
The amount of material 𝑄𝑗+1 still airborne in the plume segment after transport across the radial 
interval is the following:
𝑄𝑗+1 = 𝑄𝑗 − 𝛥𝑄𝑗 (2-51)79
Now let 𝐺𝐶(𝑦 = 0)𝑗 be the average ground concentration under the plume centerline along the 
length (Lj) of radial interval j. Then the total amount of material 𝛥𝑄𝑗 deposited onto the ground 
during transport of a plume segment across radial interval j is the following:
𝛥𝑄𝑗 = 𝐺𝐶(𝑦 = 0)𝑗
∙ 𝐿𝑗
∙ ∫ 𝑒𝑥𝑝
∞
−∞
{−
𝑦
2
2𝜎𝑦
2
} 𝑑𝑦
= 𝐺𝐶(𝑦 = 0) (2-52)
𝑗
∙ 𝐿𝑗
∙ √2𝜋𝜎𝑦 ∫
1
√2𝜋𝜎𝑦
∞
−∞
𝑒𝑥𝑝 {−
𝑦
2
2𝜎𝑦
2
} 𝑑𝑦
= 𝐺𝐶(𝑦 = 0)𝑗
∙ 𝐿𝑗
∙ √2𝜋𝜎𝑦
The equation simplifies since the value of the second integral is one. Solving for the average 
ground concentration 𝐺𝐶(𝑦 = 0)𝑗 under the plume centerline of radial interval j gives the 
following:
𝐺𝐶(𝑦 = 0)𝑗 =
𝛥𝑄𝑗
√2𝜋𝜎𝑦 ∙ 𝐿𝑗
(2-53)
Average values for the plume source activity 𝑄𝑗
, lateral dispersion 𝜎̅𝑦,𝑗
, vertical dispersion 𝜎̅𝑧,𝑗
, 
plume height ℎ𝑗
, and average windspeed 𝑢̄𝑗
for transport of a plume segment across radial interval
j are given by the following:
𝑄𝑗 = 𝑄𝑗 − 0.5 ∙ 𝛥𝑄𝑗
𝜎̅𝑦,𝑗 = 0.5 ∙ (𝜎𝑦,𝑗 + 𝜎𝑦,𝑗+1)
(2-54)
𝜎̅𝑧,𝑗 = 0.5 ∙ (𝜎𝑧,𝑗 + 𝜎𝑧,𝑗+1)
ℎ𝑗 = 0.5 ∙ (ℎ𝑗 + ℎ𝑗+1)
𝑢̄𝑗 =
𝐿𝑗
𝑡𝑗+1 − 𝑡𝑗
where the subscripts j and j + 1 signify that the value of the parameter pertains respectively to the 
inner and outer edges of the radial interval (the values when the reference location of the plume 
segment enters and leaves the radial interval), and Lj is the length of the radial interval. 
The centerline dispersion factor 𝜒
𝑄
(𝑥 = 𝑥𝑗
, 𝑦 = 0, 𝑧 = ℎ) for radial interval j and the ground-level 
dispersion factor under the plume centerline 𝜒
𝑄
(𝑥 = 𝑥𝑗
, 𝑦 = 0, 𝑧 = 0) for radial interval j can be 
derived at the downwind distance 𝑥𝑗
.
Recall from Equation (2-19) that the profile of the plume 𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) is expressed as follows:
𝜒(𝑥, 𝑦, 𝑧) =
𝑄
𝑢
∙ 𝑓𝐺
(𝑦) ∙ 𝜓(𝑧) for 𝑧 ∈ [0, 𝐻] (2-55)80
Where 
• 𝜓(𝑧) is the vertical distribution (m
-1
), which at short distances is a Gaussian distribution 
with mirrored reflections [Equation (2-20)], and at long distances is a uniform 
distribution [Equation (2-21)], 
• 𝑓𝐺
(𝑦) is the lateral Gaussian distribution (m
-1
) in the crosswind direction, as shown in 
Equation (2-18),
• 𝑄 is the released activity (Bq), and
• u is the windspeed (m/s).
The centerline air concentration 𝜒(𝑧 = ℎ̅)
𝑗
for radial interval j can be derived by solving for the 
centerline location (𝑥 = 𝑥𝑗
, 𝑦 = 0, 𝑧 = ℎ) and using the average values for radial interval j as 
given in the set of Equations (2-54):
𝜒(𝑧 = ℎ̅)
𝑗
=
𝑄𝑗
√2𝜋𝜎̅𝑦,𝑗𝑢̄𝑗
∙ 𝜓𝑗(ℎ̅) (2-56)
The centerline dispersion factor 𝜒
𝑄
(𝑧 = ℎ̅)
𝑗
for radial interval j can be derived the same way by 
also dividing Equation (2-55) by the release activity 𝑄:
𝜒
𝑄
(𝑧 = ℎ̅)
𝑗
=
1
√2𝜋𝜎̅𝑦,𝑗𝑢̄𝑗
∙ 𝜓𝑗(ℎ̅) (2-57)
By repeating the process and instead solving for the ground-level location (𝑥 = 𝑥𝑗
, 𝑦 = 0, 𝑧 = 0), 
the same steps give the ground-level air concentration 𝜒(𝑧 = 0)𝑗
for radial interval j:
𝜒(𝑧 = 0)𝑗 =
𝑄𝑗
√2𝜋𝜎̅𝑦,𝑗𝑢̄𝑗
∙ 𝜓𝑗
(0) (2-58)
As well as the ground-level dispersion factor 𝜒
𝑄
(𝑧 = 0)𝑗
for radial interval j:
𝜒
𝑄
(𝑧 = 0)𝑗 =
1
√2𝜋𝜎̅𝑦,𝑗𝑢̄𝑗
∙ 𝜓𝑗
(0) (2-59)
Finally, the ratio 𝑅𝑗 of the ground-level to centerline air concentration at radial interval j can be 
found by the following equation:
𝑅𝑗 =
𝜓𝑗
(0)
𝜓𝑗(ℎ̅)
(2-60)81
2.9 Atmospheric Transport Model Outputs
MACCS calculates atmospheric transport results at the midpoint of each radial interval traversed 
by the plume segment. MACCS reports two sets of results related to the atmospheric transport:
“Type 0” results that provide summary results from a CCDF, and “Debug Output” results that 
report results from individual weather trials. The two sets contain many of the same parameters. 
Type 0 Results: Atmospheric Results at Specified Downwind Distances
The first set is a group of outputs for a single user-specified plume segment (INDREL) and for a 
single radial interval (INDRAD). The user also selects a radionuclide of interest (NUCOUT), such 
as iodine-131. Like most outputs, MACCS computes a CCDF when many weather simulations are 
run, and summary statistics of these results are available in the output file when requested. The 
outputs and their derivations are described in Table 2-6:82
Table 2-6 Complimentary Cumulative Distribution Function of Atmospheric Results
Output Name
(for I-131) Description Derivation
I-131 Center Air Conc. 
(Bq-s/m3
)
Centerline integrated air concentration (𝑧 = 𝐻) from 
this plume segment averaged over the radial interval’s 
length
Equation (2-56), adjusted by 
decay and ingrowth
I-131 Ground Air Conc. 
(Bq-s/m3
)
Centerline ground-level integrated air concentration 
(𝑧 = 0) from this plume segment averaged over the 
radial interval’s length
(Bq-s/m3
)
Equation (2-58), adjusted by 
decay and ingrowth
I-131 Center Ground 
Conc. (Bq/m2
)
Centerline ground concentration after passage of this 
plume averaged over the radial interval’s length
(Bq/m2
)
Equation (2-53), adjusted by 
decay and ingrowth
Total Center Ground 
Conc. (Bq/m2
)
Total Centerline ground concentration after passage of 
this plume averaged over the radial interval’s length
(Bq/m2
)
Equation (2-53), summed over
all radionuclides, adjusted by 
decay and ingrowth
Ground-Level Dilution, 
𝜒/𝑄 (s/m3
)
Centerline ground-level 𝜒/𝑄; the ratio of air 
concentration (𝜒) to source strength (𝑄) averaged over 
the interval’s length, not accounting for radioactive 
decay or deposition (s/m3
)
Equation (2-59)
I-131 Adjusteda Source, 
𝑄 (Bq)
Adjusteda
source strength of the plume upon entering 
each radial interval after adjustment for losses in the 
previous intervals due to radioactive decay and wet 
and dry deposition (Bq)
Equation (2-50), adjusted by 
decay and ingrowth
Plume Sigma-y (m)
Lateral dispersion parameter 𝜎̅𝑦 averaged over the 
radial interval’s length Equations (2-54)
Plume Sigma-z (m)
Vertical dispersion parameter 𝜎̅𝑧 averaged over the 
radial interval’s length Equations (2-54)
Plume Height (m)
Average plume centerline height as it traverses the 
radial interval Equations (2-54)
Plume Arrival Time (s)
Time after accident initiation at which the reference 
location of the plume arrived at the center of the radial 
interval (s) 
Equation (2-32) plus the 
period before plume release 
(PDELAY)
a
In the Gaussian plume equations, 𝑄0 is commonly used to represent the amount released activity. When material decays or is 
deposited onto the ground during transport, the effective source strength for downwind distances is reduced. This is treated in 
MACCS through the definition of an adjusted source strength, 𝑄, which is reduced by deposition and radioactive decay that 
occur over plume trajectory up to the current location. Note that all the concentration results shown in this table account for 
plume depletion; however, the value for 𝜒/𝑄 does not. This quantity simply represents the normalized concentration (s/m3
) 
from dispersion at a downwind distance.
Atmospheric Transport Debug Output
Additionally, another set of atmospheric transport model results are available as part of the 
debugging tools (IDEBUG), and again for a select radionuclide (NUCOUT). Some of these results 
are identical outputs to those in the previous table but are not available as a CCDF. Instead, 
MACCS reports values for every weather simulation, plume segment, and distance interval. The 
type of output results and derivations are shown in Table 2-7.83
Table 2-7 Atmospheric Results Available through debug results (IDEBUG = “1” or “2”)
Output 
Name Description Derivation
GL AIRCON Centerline ground-level integrated air concentration (𝑧 = 0) from this 
plume segment averaged over the radial interval’s length (Bq-s/m3
)
Equation (2-58),
adjusted by decay 
and ingrowth
GRNCON Centerline ground concentration after passage of this plume averaged 
over the radial interval’s length (Bq/m2
)
Equation (2-53),
adjusted by decay 
and ingrowth
GL 𝜒/𝑄
Centerline ground-level 𝜒/𝑄; the ratio of air concentration (𝜒) to source 
strength (𝑄), averaged over the interval’s length (s/m3
)
Equation (2-59)
WETREM Fraction of material remaining in the plume segment after wet deposition 
over the radial interval’s length (dimensionless) Equation (2-43)
DRYREM Fraction of material remaining in the plume segment after dry deposition 
over the radial interval’s length (dimensionless) Equation (2-48)
REMINV
Adjusted source strength of the plume upon entering each radial interval
after adjustment for losses in the previous intervals due to radioactive 
decay and wet and dry deposition (Bq)
Equation (2-51),
adjusted by decay 
and ingrowth
PLSIGY Lateral dispersion parameter 𝜎̅𝑦 averaged over the radial interval’s length
(m)
Equations (2-54)
PLSIGZ Vertical dispersion parameter 𝜎̅𝑧 averaged over the radial interval’s 
length (m)
Equations (2-54)
WEATHER
Indices to the first and last hours of the weather sequence used for 
determining atmospheric conditions during transport across each radial 
interval (hr)
Equation (2-33)
HTFCTR Ratio of the centerline ground-level air concentration (𝑧 = 0) to the 
plume centerline air concentration (𝑧 = 𝐻) (dimensionless) Equation (2-60)
AVGHIT Average plume centerline height as it traverses the radial interval (m) Equations (2-54)
TIMCEN Time after accident initiation at which the reference location of the plume 
arrived at the center of the radial interval (s)
Equation (2-32) plus 
the period before 
plume release 
(PDELAY)
TIMOVH Duration for which the plume was overhead at the midpoint of the radial 
interval (s)
Equation (2-33)
MXMIXH Mixing height for this plume segment over the radial interval (m)
From mixing height 
model (